Compound: Delta(7)-sterol
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:138130

== ChEBI definition ==
Any sterol that contains a double bond between positions 7 and 8.

== Literature on Delta(7)-sterol ==

[PMID 29080637] Genetic and Racial Differences in the Vitamin D Endocrine System
2017
Twin studies indicate that genetic factors may explain about 50% of the variation of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD). Polymorphisms of 3 genes, delta-7-sterol-reductase, CYP2R1, and DBP/GC (and maybe CYP24A1) combined, can explain about 5% to 10% of the variation in serum 25OHD. These polymorphisms are found in nearly all populations. The variation in serum 25OHD found in different areas and populations in the world is mainly due to environmental and lifestyle factors, not truly dependent on racial differences. One genetic variant of DBP, (GC2), is associated with a modest (∼10%) decrease in serum DBP and 25OHD concentrations for unexplained reasons.

[PMID 19053780] Novel 4-(4-aryl)cyclohexyl-1-(2-pyridyl)piperazines as Delta(8)-Delta(7) sterol isomerase (emopamil binding protein) selective ligands with antiproliferative activity
2008
To find Delta(8)-Delta(7) sterol isomerase (EBP) selective ligands, various arylpiperazines previously studied and structurally related to some sigma receptors ligands were preliminarily screened. Consequently, a novel series of 2- or 2,6-disubstituted (CH(3), CH(3)O, Cl, F) cis- and trans-4-(4-aryl)cyclohexyl-1-(2-pyridyl)piperazines was developed. Radioreceptor binding assays evidenced cis-19, cis-30 and cis-33 as new ligands with nanomolar affinity toward EBP site and a good selectivity relative to EBP-related sigma receptors. The most selective 2,6-dimethoxy derivative (cis-33) demonstrated the highest potency (EC(50) = 12.9 microM) and efficacy (70%) in inhibiting proliferation of human prostate cancer PC-3 cell line. Among the reference compounds, sigma(2) agonist 36 (PB28) reached the maximum efficacy (100%), suggesting the contribution of the sigma(2) receptor to the antiproliferative activity. This novel class of EBP inhibitors represents a valuable tool for investigating the last steps of cholesterol biosynthesis and related pathologies, as well as a starting point for developing new anticancer drugs.

[PMID 8561508] Plant sterol biosynthesis: identification and characterization of higher plant delta 7-sterol C5(6)-desaturase
1996
Microsomes obtained from maize seedlings catalyzed the introduction of the delta5-bond into delta7-sterols to yield the corresponding delta 5,7-sterols. Enzymatic bioassay conditions have been developed for the first time for delta 7-sterol C5(6)-desaturase in photosynthetic organisms. The properties of the microsomal system have been studied and the kinetics of the desaturation reaction has been established. The desaturation reaction requires molecular oxygen and NADH. Coenzyme efficiency studies indicate that NADH is more efficient that NADPH and that in the presence of NADH, NAD+ stimulates the desaturation process but cannot sustain the reaction by itself. The desaturation is strongly inhibited by cyanide, is sensitive to 1,10-phenanthroline and to salicylhydroxamic acid, but is insensitive to carbon monoxide, suggesting the involvement of a metal ion, presumably iron, in an enzyme-bound form in the desaturating system. From a series of incubations with delta 7-sterols and other sterol analogs, the substrate specificity for desaturation was determined. Our data indicate the substrate selectivity of the C5(6)-desaturation for 4-desmethyl-delta 7-sterols. Moreover, the results show that specificity of maize C5(6)-desaturase favored delta 7-sterols possessing a C24-methylene or ethylidene substituent compared to 24-ethyl-substituted delta 7-sterols. Finally, the results demonstrate directly that during plant sterol synthesis the delta 5-bond is introduced via the sequence delta 7-sterol-->delta 5,7-sterol-->delta 5-sterol.

[PMID 7550378] An Arabidopsis mutant deficient in sterol biosynthesis: heterologous complementation by ERG 3 encoding a delta 7-sterol-C-5-desaturase from yeast
1995
The mutant STE 1 was isolated by screening an ethylmethane sulfonate (EMS)-mutagenized population of Arabidopsis thaliana which consisted of 22,000 M2 plants divided into 1100 pools of 20 plants by gas chromatography of sterols extracted from small leaf samples. STE 1 was characterized by the accumulation of three delta 7-sterols concomitantly with the decrease of the three corresponding delta 5-sterols which are the end products of the sterol pathway in wild-type leaves. The structure of these delta 7-sterols was determined after two steps of purification on HPLC, by gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry (1H-NMR). The accumulation of delta 7-sterols suggested that the mutant is deficient in the activity of the delta 7-sterol-C-5-desaturase. Genetic analysis showed that the accumulation of delta 7-sterols was due to a single recessive nuclear mutation. The mutant line STE 1 was backcrossed four times to the wild-type. The resulting STE 1 plants had wild-type morphology and set seeds normally, suggesting that the delta 7-sterols in STE 1 are good surrogates of physiologically active delta 5-sterols to sustain normal development. STE 1 roots were transformed with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ERG 3 gene encoding the delta 7-sterol-C-5-desaturase under the control of the CaMV 35S promoter. Seven transgenic STE 1 root-derived calli showed an increase in delta 5-sterols and a concomitant decrease in delta 7-sterols in comparison with STE 1 untransformed root-derived calli. Northern blot analysis using the ERG 3 probe showed a strong expression of ERG 3 in three of the seven transgenic calli. These results suggest that the accumulation of delta 7-sterols in the STE 1 mutant is due to a deficiency of the delta 7-sterol-C-5-desaturation step in the plant sterol biosynthesis pathway.

[PMID 11346939] Brassinosteroids, microtubules and cell elongation in Arabidopsis thaliana. I. Molecular, cellular and physiological characterization of the Arabidopsis bull mutant, defective in the delta 7-sterol-C5-desaturation step leading to brassinosteroid biosynthesis
2001
Although cell elongation is a basic function of plant morphogenesis, many of the molecular events involved in this process are still unknown. In this work an extremely dwarf mutant, originally named bul, was used to study one of the main processes of plant development, cell elongation. Genetic analyses revealed that the BUL locus was linked to the nga172 marker on chromosome 3. Recently, after mapping the new dwf7 mutation of Arabidopsis, which is allelic to ste1, it was reported that dwf7 is also linked to the same marker. Sterol analyses of the bull-1 mutant indicated that bul1-1 is defective in the delta 7-sterol-C5-desaturation step leading to brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Considering these findings, we designated our bul mutant as bul1-1/dwf7-3/ste1-4. The bul1-1 mutant was characterized by a very dwarf phenotype, with delayed development and reduced fertility. The mutant leaves had a dark-green colour, which was probably due to continuous stomatal closure. The bul1-1 mutant showed a partially de-etiolated phenotype in the dark. Cellular characterization and rescue experiments with brassinosteroids demonstrated the involvement of the BUL1-1 protein in brassinosteroid-dependent plant growth processes.
