Compound: 3beta-hydroxy-Delta(5)-steroid
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:1722

== ChEBI definition ==
Any 3β-hydroxy-steroid that contains a double bond between positions 5 and 6.

== Literature on 3beta-hydroxy-Delta(5)-steroid ==

[PMID 17184799] Plant progesterone 5beta-reductase is not homologous to the animal enzyme. Molecular evolutionary characterization of P5betaR from Digitalis purpurea
2007
Plants of the genus Digitalis produce cardiac glycosides, i.e. digoxin, which are widely used for congestive heart failure. Progesterone 5beta-reductase (P5betaR) is a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of these natural products. Here, we have carried out the purification and partial amino acid sequencing of the native P5betaR from foxglove (Digitalis purpurea), and isolated a cDNA encoding this enzyme. Similarly to other steroid 5beta-reductases, the recombinant P5betaR catalyzes the stereospecific reduction of the Delta(4)-double bond of several steroids with a 3-oxo,Delta(4,5) structure. The gene encoding P5betaR is expressed in all plant organs, and maximally transcribed in leaves and mature flowers. P5betaR belongs to the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) superfamily, bearing no structural homology to its mammalian counterpart, which is a member of the aldo-keto reductase (AKR) superfamily. A similar situation occurs with 3beta-hydroxy-Delta(5)-steroid dehydrogenase (3betaHSD), the gene immediately preceding P5betaR in the cardenolide pathway, which suggests that the entire route has evolved independently in animals and plants. P5betaR is retained only in plants, where it is ubiquitous, and a few distantly related bacterial lineages after its diversification from the last universal common ancestor. Evolutionary conserved changes in its putative active site suggest that plant P5betaR is a member of a novel subfamily of extended SDRs, or a new SDR family.

[PMID 12242026] Nitric oxide potently inhibits the rate-limiting enzymatic step in steroidogenesis
2002
This study tested the hypothesis that nitric oxide (NO) inhibits the rate-limiting catalytic step in steroidogenesis, cytochrome P450 cholesterol side-chain cleaving enzyme (CYP11A1), independent of soluble guanylyl cyclase (GC-S) stimulation. To assess CYP11A1 activity, pregnenolone levels were quantified in murine adrenocortical Y1 cells in the presence of the 3beta-hydroxy-Delta(5)-steroid dehydrogenase inhibitor, 2alpha-cyano-17beta-hydroxy-4,4',17alpha-trimethylandrost-5-ene-3-one. The NO donor, (Z)-1-[2-(2-aminoethyl-N-(2-ammonioethyl)amino]diazen-1-ium-1,2-diolate(deta nonoate), inhibited vasoactive intestinal peptide-, forskolin- and 22alpha-hydroxycholesterol (22HC)-facilitated pregnenolonogenesis in the absence of GC-S activation and in the presence of a GC-S inhibitor, 1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo[4,3-a]quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ). CYP11A1 was also heterologously expressed in monkey COS7 cells. Deta nonoate inhibited 22HC-facilitated activity of the over-expressed enzyme in the absence of GC-S activation and in the presence of ODQ. The NO-independent, GC-S agonist, 1-benzyl-3-(5'-hydroxymethyl-2'-furyl)indazole did not inhibit steroidogenesis. The IC(50) for effects of free NO on CYP11A1 was potent and in the 0.4-2 microM range. These results support the hypothesis that NO inhibits the rate-limiting enzyme in steroidogenesis independent of GC-S activation.

[PMID 11604025] QSARs for 6-azasteroids as inhibitors of human type 1 5alpha-reductase: prediction of binding affinity and selectivity relative to 3-BHSD
2001
Quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSARs) are developed to describe the ability of 6-azasteroids to inhibit human type 1 5alpha-reductase. Models are generated using a set of 93 compounds with known binding affinities (K(i)) to 5alpha-reductase and 3beta-hydroxy-Delta(5)-steroid dehydrogenase/3-keto-Delta(5)-steroid isomerase (3-BHSD). QSARs are generated to predict K(i) values for inhibitors of 5alpha-reductase and to predict selectivity (S(i)) of compound binding to 3-BHSD relative to 5alpha-reductase. Log(K(i)) values range from -0.70 log units to 4.69 log units, and log(S(i)) values range from -3.00 log units to 3.84 log units. Topological, geometric, electronic, and polar surface descriptors are used to encode molecular structure. Information-rich subsets of descriptors are identified using evolutionary optimization procedures. Predictive models are generated using linear regression, computational neural networks (CNNs), principal components regression, and partial least squares. Compounds in an external prediction set are used for model validation. A 10-3-1 CNN is developed for prediction of binding affinity to 5alpha-reductase that produces root-mean-square error (RMSE) of 0.293 log units (R(2) = 0.97) for compounds in the external prediction set. Additionally, an 8-3-1 CNN is generated for prediction of inhibitor selectivity that produces RMSE = 0.513 log units (R(2) = 0.89) for the external prediction set. Models are further validated through Monte Carlo experiments in which models are generated after dependent variable values have been scrambled.

[PMID 4392955] The roles of pregn-5-ene-3 beta, 20 alpha-diol and 20 alpha-hydroxy steroid dehydrogenase in the control of progesterone synthesis preceding parturition and lactogenesis in the rat
1970
1. The activity of 20alpha-hydroxy steroid dehydrogenase in rat ovarian corpora lutea increased at least 50-fold between 2 days before and 2 days after parturition, and then fell gradually during lactation. The activity of 3beta-hydroxy Delta(5)-steroid dehydrogenase decreased by 50% at parturition but remained constant at other times. 2. The 20alpha-hydroxypregn-4-en-3-one/progesterone concentration ratio in the ovary fell tenfold between 1 day before and 1 day after parturition, in contrast with the increase of the ratio for these steroids in plasma. 3. Pregnenolone was metabolized in intact cells or cell-free systems either to pregn-5-ene-3beta,20alpha-diol and then to 20alpha-hydroxypregn-4-en-3-one by 20alpha-hydroxy steroid dehydrogenase and 3beta-hydroxy Delta(5)-steroid dehydrogenase respectively, or directly to progesterone by the latter enzyme. The relative activities of these pathways appeared to reflect the relative amounts of the two enzymes and the concentrations of their respective coenzymes NADPH and NAD(+). 4. From these and other observations it was concluded that the cessation of progesterone secretion, which precedes parturition and lactogenesis at the end of pregnancy, is partly due to the redirected metabolism of pregnenolone away from progesterone and towards 20alpha-hydroxypregn-4-en-3-one as the secreted end product. This is primarily the consequence of the sharp increase in the activity of 20alpha-hydroxy steroid dehydrogenase. This mechanism is super-imposed on the already declining rate of net Delta(4)-steroid release by the ovary. 5. A relationship of these pathways to subcellular compartments of luteal cells is proposed.

[PMID 7545534] Proliferation and progesterone production of ovine luteal cells from several stages of the estrous cycle: effects of fibroblast growth factors and luteinizing hormone
1995
This study was conducted to evaluate the effects of fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF-1), fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2), or luteinizing hormone (LH) on proliferation and progesterone secretion of ovine luteal cells from days 5, 10, or 15 after estrus (estrus = day 0; n = 4 or 5 ewes/day). After enzymatic dispersion, luteal cells were incubated in the presence or absence of various doses of FGF-1, FGF-2, LH, or fetal bovine serum (FBS) (positive control) in serum-free media for 7 days in 24-well plates. Cells were counted on day 7 of culture and media analyzed for progesterone concentration. For all treatments, maximal effects (Emax) and dissociation constants (KD) were calculated. In addition, luteal cells were cultured in eight-chamber slides and treated as above, but on day 7 of culture cells were fixed and stained for the presence of 3beta-hydroxy-delta 5-steroid dehydrogenase (3beta HSD). The number of steroidogenic (3beta HSD positive) cells per unit area was counted for control cultures (no treatment) and cultures treated with the most effective doses of FGF-1, FGF-2, LH, OR FBS in proliferation and (or) progesterone assays. FGF-1, FGF-2, AND FBS stimulated (p < 0.05) proliferation of luteal cells from all stages of luteal development in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, LH increased (p < 0.01) the number of 3beta HSD-positive cells across all stages of luteal development. Moreover, LH and FBS increased (p < 0.05) progesterone secretion by luteal cells from all stages in a dose-responsive manner, but the effects of FGF-1 and FGF-2 were variable. For proliferation, the Emax of all factors was greatest (p < 0.01) on day 5, whereas the KD values were similar across days of the estrous cycle. For progesterone production, the Emax and KD of LH and FBS were similar and did not differ across the estrous cycle. These data demonstrate the luteal cells from the early luteal phase of the estrous cycle exhibit the greatest ability to proliferate and (or) increase their progesterone secretion in response to FGF-1, FGF-2, LH, or FBS. In addition, although LH does not affect the total number of luteal cells in culture, it does increase the number of steroidogenic cells. These data indicate that in addition to LH, fibroblast growth factors may be involved in regulation of luteal growth and differentiation in ewes.
