Compound: C21-steroid
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:61313
PubChem CID: 12547

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: 17-ethyl-10,13-dimethyl-2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,16,17-tetradecahydro-1H-cyclopenta[a]phenanthrene
Molecular Formula: C21H36
Molecular Weight: 288.5
SMILES: CCC1CCC2C1(CCC3C2CCC4C3(CCCC4)C)C
InChI: InChI=1S/C21H36/c1-4-15-9-11-18-17-10-8-16-7-5-6-13-20(16,2)19(17)12-14-21(15,18)3/h15-19H,4-14H2,1-3H3
InChIKey: JWMFYGXQPXQEEM-UHFFFAOYSA-N
XLogP: 8.4
TPSA: 0
H-Bond Donors: 0
H-Bond Acceptors: 0

== ChEBI definition ==
A steroid that has a structure based on a 21-carbon (pregnane) skeleton. Note that individual examples may have ring substituents at other positions and/or contain double bonds, aromatic A-rings, expanded/contracted rings etc., so the formula and mass may vary from that given for the generic structure.

== Literature on C21-steroid ==

[PMID 42393863] Chromosome-Level Reference Genome Assembly Provides Insights Into C21 Steroid Saponins Biosynthesis in Cynanchum atratum
2026
Cynanchum atratum, a perennial medicinal plant belonging to the genus Cynanchum in the Apocynaceae family, is rich in C21 steroidal saponins. This study presented a chromosome-level genome assembly of C. atratum using PacBio long-read sequencing technology. The assembly resulted in a 361.85 Mb genome with a contig N50 of 5.13 Mb, of which 86.55% was scaffolded into 11 pseudochromosomes. Among the 18 871 predicted protein-coding genes, 98.3% have been functionally annotated. Comparative genomic analyses reveal the evolutionary dynamics of C. atratum and a notable contrast between contracted and expanded gene families. Transcriptome sequencing was performed using root, stem, and leaf samples collected in August from 1- and 2-year-old plants. LC-MS quantification across 4 months revealed that leaves were the main accumulation tissue of cynatratoside-C (CyC), and the highest content was detected in leaves of 2-year-old plants in October. cynatratoside-C correlation of metabolite content with gene expression patterns led to the identification of 11 CYP and 16 UGT genes potentially involved in the biosynthesis of CyC, and as well as a putative biosynthetic gene cluster on chromosome 3. Based on the genome and transcriptome, a putative biosynthetic pathway for CyC was further proposed.

[PMID 40247088] Dysregulated maternal and newborn fatty acid, sugar and amino acid metabolism associated with high birth weight
2025
ObjectiveThis study aims to find maternal and neonatal metabolomic signatures that contribute to the adverse birthweight outcomes including abnormally high and low birth weight. We also investigated the role of metabolomic signatures in the associations of maternal risk factors such as parity and gestational weight gain with adverse birthweight outcomes.MethodsNinety-six pregnant women and their newborns from the MADRES prospective cohort were studied. Maternal serum at third trimester and newborn cord blood were assayed for untargeted metabolomics using mass-spectrometry. Metabolome-wide association analysis was conducted to assess maternal and newborn metabolomic features association with birth weight Z-score, followed by network analysis of maternal and newborn metabolomics. Lastly, the contribution of maternal and newborn metabolomics to associations between maternal risk factors and newborn birthweight was assessed.ResultsMaternal gestational weight gain and parity were positively associated with newborn birthweight. Maternal glucose and branched-chain amino acid metabolism pathways and newborn's fatty acid, glucose metabolism and C21-steroid hormone biosynthesis were significantly enriched with high birth weight Z-score. Dysregulation in these pathways linked maternal factors such as gestational weight gain and parity with high birth weight Z-score.ConclusionOur findings indicate that altered maternal sugar and energy metabolism, newborn sugar and amino acid metabolism, and newborn C21-steroid hormone biosynthesis were associated with high birth weight. Dysregulated metabolism in pregnant women and newborn may contribute to the pathophysiological mechanisms linking maternal excessive gestational weight gain and multiparity with high birth weight.

[PMID 40158186] Maternal metabolomics linking prenatal exposure to fine particulate matter and birth weight: a cross-sectional analysis of the MADRES cohort
2025
BackgroundPrenatal exposure to air pollution has been associated with an increased risk of low birth weight. Disrupted metabolism may serve as an underlying mechanism, but the specific metabolic pathways involved remain unclear.MethodsIn the Maternal and Developmental Risks from Environmental and Social Stressors (MADRES) study, 382 third-trimester maternal serum samples were analyzed for untargeted metabolomics using liquid chromatography with Fourier transform high-resolution mass spectrometry. Ambient concentrations of fine particulate matter (PM2.5), particulate matter ≤ 10 μm in diameter (PM10), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and ozone (O3) were estimated using inverse-distance-squared weighted spatial interpolation based on daily residential histories. Birth weight was retrieved from medical records. Linear regression identified metabolomic features associated with air pollution exposure or birth weight, followed by Mummichog pathway enrichment and mediation analyses for the selected features.ResultsSecond-trimester PM2.5 exposure was associated with lower birth weight. Fourteen metabolic pathways were significantly associated with second-trimester PM2.5 exposure, with C21-steroid hormone biosynthesis and metabolism showing the most significant association. Sixteen metabolic pathways were significantly associated with birth weight, with vitamin A (retinol) metabolism being the most significantly enriched pathway. Seven pathways were associated with both PM2.5 exposure and birth weight, including C21-steroid hormone biosynthesis and metabolism, bile acid biosynthesis, tyrosine metabolism, ascorbate (vitamin C) and aldarate metabolism, vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) metabolism, vitamin A (retinol) metabolism, and pyrimidine metabolism. Overweight or obese women exhibited more metabolomic features and metabolic pathways associated with PM2.5 exposure compared to underweight or normal-weight women. No associations were observed between PM10, NO2, or O3 and birth weight.ConclusionsMaternal metabolic pathways involving steroid metabolism, oxidative stress and inflammation, vitamin metabolism, and DNA damage may link prenatal PM2.5 exposure to lower birth weight, with overweight or obese women potentially more susceptible to these metabolic disruptions.

[PMID 40863162] Serum Metabolomic Signatures in Nonhuman Primates Treated with a Countermeasure and Exposed to Partial- or Total-Body Radiation
2025
Background: Irradiation-induced injury is a common fallout of radiological/nuclear accidents or therapeutic exposures to high doses of radiation at high dose rates. Currently, there are no prophylactic drugs available to mitigate radiation injury as a result of exposure to lethal doses of ionizing radiation. Gamma-tocotrienol (GT3) of vitamin E is a promising radioprotector under advanced development which has been tested for efficacy in both murine and nonhuman primate (NHP) models. Previously, we have demonstrated that GT3 has radioprotective efficacy in intestinal epithelial and crypt cells, and restores transcriptomic changes in NHPs with a supralethal dose of 12 Gy total-body irradiation (TBI). Methods: In this study, we evaluated the effect of 12 Gy partial-body irradiation (PBI) or TBI on metabolomic changes in serum samples and the extent to which GT3 was able to modulate these irradiation-induced changes. A total of 32 nonhuman primates were used for this study, and blood sample were collected 3 days (d) prior to irradiation, and 4 h, 8 h, 12 h, 1 d, 2 d, and 6 d post-irradiation. Results: Our results demonstrate that exposure to a supralethal dose of radiation induces a complex range of metabolomic shifts with similar degrees of dysregulation in both partial- and total-body irradiated animals. The C21-steroid hormone biosynthesis and metabolism pathway was significantly dysregulated in both PBI and TBI groups, with minimal protection afforded by GT3 administration. Conclusions: GT3 offered a differential response in terms of protected metabolites and pathways in either group that was most effective at the early post-irradiation time points.

[PMID 37046333] The effect of etanercept therapy on adrenal steroid metabolism in juvenile idiopathic arthritis: a steroid metabolomics approach
2023
ObjectiveTo evaluate the impact of anti-tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα: etanercept [Etanercept ®]) therapy on adrenal activity in juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) .MethodEleven JIA patients aged 12 ± 6.2 years with a disease duration of 6.3 ± 5.2 years were enrolled. They were treated once weekly with etanercept (0.8 mg/kg) for 3 ± 2.8 years. Urine samples for gas chromatography-mass spectrometry steroid hormone analysis were collected before, and 1 and 3 days after etanercept injection and compared to age- and sex-matched healthy controls.ResultsThe levels of 21 of the 31 metabolites were low before etanercept treatment. Those 21 metabolites included 4 C19 steroids (androgens), 5 C C21 steroid hormone intermediates, 10 cortisol metabolites, and 2 corticosterone metabolites. One day after treatment, only 5 of the 21 metabolite levels remained low. They included 2 C19 metabolites, 2 C21 steroid metabolites and 1 cortisol metabolite β -Cortol (β-Cl). Three days after treatment, the only metabolites levels that continued to be low were 2 C19 metabolite, 2 C21 steroid hormone intermediates and 1 cortisol metabolite α-Cortol (a-Cl), while the remaining 15 metabolites had already normalized after 1 day. Dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate and 17-hydroxypregnenolone metabolite levels were the last ones to recover. Urinary metabolite ratios reflecting cytochrome P450 CYP21A2 (21-hydroxylase) and 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11β-HSD2) enzymatic activitieswere lower in JIA patients than in controls, although significant was not reached.ConclusionAlmost all of the pre-etanercept treatment cortisol urinary metabolite levels were significantly lower than normal, and almost all rose to normal values by 1 day after treatment. The therapeutic effect of anti-TNFα treatment in JIA may be related to its effect on the restoration of adrenal function and cortisol levels.
