Compound: lupeol
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:6570
PubChem CID: 259846

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: (1R,3aR,5aR,5bR,7aR,9S,11aR,11bR,13aR,13bR)-3a,5a,5b,8,8,11a-hexamethyl-1-prop-1-en-2-yl-1,2,3,4,5,6,7,7a,9,10,11,11b,12,13,13a,13b-hexadecahydrocyclopenta[a]chrysen-9-ol
Molecular Formula: C30H50O
Molecular Weight: 426.7
SMILES: CC(=C)[C@@H]1CC[C@]2([C@H]1[C@H]3CC[C@@H]4[C@]5(CC[C@@H](C([C@@H]5CC[C@]4([C@@]3(CC2)C)C)(C)C)O)C)C
InChI: InChI=1S/C30H50O/c1-19(2)20-11-14-27(5)17-18-29(7)21(25(20)27)9-10-23-28(6)15-13-24(31)26(3,4)22(28)12-16-30(23,29)8/h20-25,31H,1,9-18H2,2-8H3/t20-,21+,22-,23+,24-,25+,27+,28-,29+,30+/m0/s1
InChIKey: MQYXUWHLBZFQQO-QGTGJCAVSA-N
XLogP: 9.9
TPSA: 20.2
H-Bond Donors: 1
H-Bond Acceptors: 1

== ChEBI definition ==
A pentacyclic triterpenoid that is lupane in which the hydrogen at the 3β position is substituted by a hydroxy group. It occurs in the skin of lupin seeds, as well as in the latex of fig trees and of rubber plants. It is also found in many edible fruits and vegetables.

== Literature on lupeol ==

[PMID 42302369] Lupeol in neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders: Mechanisms and translational perspectives
2026
Lupeol is a naturally occurring lupane-type pentacyclic triterpenoid widely distributed in dietary and medicinal plants and has attracted increasing interest as a potential neuroprotective compound. However, despite growing experimental evidence, its mechanistic and translational relevance has not been comprehensively evaluated. This review critically examines current evidence regarding the molecular, cellular and neurobehavioural effects of lupeol in neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders. Available preclinical studies indicate that lupeol modulates several interconnected pathological processes implicated in neurological disorders, including oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, apoptosis, excitotoxicity and synaptic impairment. These effects include preservation of neuronal integrity, improved cognitive and behavioural outcomes, and enhanced neurotrophic and synaptic plasticity across multiple experimental models of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, cerebral ischemia, traumatic brain injury and neuroinflammation. Current findings suggest that lupeol exerts multi-target neuroprotective effects through coordinated regulation of oxidative, inflammatory and neuronal signalling networks rather than through a single molecular mechanism. Despite these encouraging findings, clinical translation remains limited by poor aqueous solubility, low bioavailability and insufficient pharmacokinetic and human safety data. Overall, lupeol represents a promising candidate for further investigation in neurological disorders, although rigorous translational studies remain necessary to clarify its therapeutic applicability.

[PMID 42366760] Applications of lupeol to manage fungal infections: a promising multi-target molecule
2026
Lupeol, a pentacyclic triterpene found in various plant species, has gained prominence due to its antioxidant, anticancer, anti-inflammatory, antifungal properties, along with its low toxicity. In view of the increasing resistance to antifungal agents and the limited therapeutic arsenal available, research on natural bioactive compounds with antimicrobial potential, such as lupeol, has intensified. This review compiles and critically discusses evidence identified through a literature search performed in SciELO, PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, ScienceDirect, and additional relevant sources for studies published from 2003 to 2025, using combined descriptors related to lupeol, antifungal activity, fungal infections, Candida, Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, dermatophytes, biofilm, virulence factors, mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetics, bioavailability, nanoformulations, nanotechnology, molecular docking, molecular dynamics, and in silico approaches. The pharmacokinetic properties of lupeol and the nanotechnological strategies aimed at enhancing its biopharmaceutical potential are also discussed. In addition, in silico approaches that have contributed to understanding the molecular interactions of lupeol with fungal targets are presented, as well as the development of new derivatives. In summary, this article identifies lupeol as a promising multifunctional molecule for antifungal therapy in the face of increasing microbial resistance and the demand for more effective and less harmful antifungal agents.

[PMID 42081654] Manganese Porphyrin-Catalyzed One-Pot Oxidation of Lupeol: Efficient Conversion of Its Terminal Alkene Into Carboxylic Acids
2026
The PhI(OAc)2-oxidation of the triterpene lupeol by manganese porphyrin was achieved, leading to 94% of lupeol conversion. Conditions aligned with principles of green chemistry, including the use of ethyl acetate as a solvent and iodobenzene diacetate as an oxidant, were studied. This approach led to the production of eight products from lupeol, notably achieving transformations at the C20 olefin moiety; six lupeol's products were isolated whereas the other two had their structures proposed supported on basic chemical tests (e.g., Fehling's test) and well‑established reactivity patterns in organic chemistry. These modifications were performed without the typical preceding protection of the C3 hydroxyl of lupeol, simplifying the synthetic route. Besides, the isopropenyl group of lupeol was converted to carboxylic acids through one-pot oxidation. This study reinforces the promising use of manganese porphyrins as catalysts for the oxidative transformation of other natural products of biological interest.

[PMID 42089891] Lupeol as a modulator of bacterial resistance mediated by the MepA efflux pump in Staphylococcus aureus
2026
Bacterial resistance constitutes one of the main threats to global public health, driving the search for therapeutic strategies capable of restoring the effectiveness of antimicrobials. Among the mechanisms involved, efflux pumps stand out, reducing the intracellular concentration of drugs and contributing to multidrug resistance. In this context, inhibitors of these pumps emerge as a promising approach, as they increase the intracellular concentration of antibiotics. Natural compounds, such as the triterpene lupeol, have been investigated as potential modulators of bacterial resistance due to their relevant biological activities. This study evaluated, from a mechanistic perspective, the ability of lupeol to inhibit the MepA efflux pump in the K2068 strain of Staphylococcus aureus. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was determined, efflux inhibition assays were performed, membrane permeability analysis was conducted using Sytox Green, ethidium bromide fluorescence was evaluated, RT-qPCR was performed, and molecular docking was performed. The results demonstrated that lupeol exhibits isolated antibacterial activity considered without clinical relevance (MIC ≥ 1024 µg/mL); however, it reduced the MIC of ciprofloxacin and ethidium bromide, indicating inhibition of the MepA pump. No alteration in membrane permeability and an increase in ethidium bromide fluorescence were observed with increasing lupeol concentration. RT-qPCR showed inhibition of mepA gene expression. In molecular docking, the compound presented a binding energy of - 9.01 kcal/mol, with van der Waals, hydrophobic, and hydrogen bonding interactions. It is concluded that lupeol shows potential as an efflux pump inhibitor, acting on the functional inhibition of the pump and the negative regulation of mepA gene expression, thus configuring itself as an adjuvant strategy in combating bacterial resistance.

[PMID 42016240] A Novel Role for Lupeol in Hepatocellular Carcinoma Treatment via Promoting Autophagy to Suppress Exosome Secretion
2026
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly lethal malignancy presenting a considerable challenge due to limited therapeutic options. This study investigates the anti-cancer mechanisms of Lupeol, a natural triterpenoid. Our results demonstrated that Lupeol exhibited significant anti-proliferative effects on HepG2 cells with an IC50 of 42.82 μM at 24 h. Furthermore, Lupeol treatment significantly inhibited cell migration and suppressed the secretion of exosomes, as evidenced by the downregulation of exosome markers (CD63, TSG101) (p p < 0.05). These findings suggest that Lupeol inhibits HCC progression by inducing autophagy to suppress exosome secretion, rather than merely acting as a correlative factor. This study elucidates a novel mechanism where Lupeol redirects multivesicular bodies toward the autophagic-lysosomal pathway, highlighting its potential as an effective therapeutic strategy for HCC.
