Compound: campestanol
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:36799
PubChem CID: 119394

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: (3S,5S,8R,9S,10S,13R,14S,17R)-17-[(2R,5R)-5,6-dimethylheptan-2-yl]-10,13-dimethyl-2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,16,17-tetradecahydro-1H-cyclopenta[a]phenanthren-3-ol
Molecular Formula: C28H50O
Molecular Weight: 402.7
SMILES: C[C@H](CC[C@@H](C)C(C)C)[C@H]1CC[C@@H]2[C@@]1(CC[C@H]3[C@H]2CC[C@@H]4[C@@]3(CC[C@@H](C4)O)C)C
InChI: InChI=1S/C28H50O/c1-18(2)19(3)7-8-20(4)24-11-12-25-23-10-9-21-17-22(29)13-15-27(21,5)26(23)14-16-28(24,25)6/h18-26,29H,7-17H2,1-6H3/t19-,20-,21+,22+,23+,24-,25+,26+,27+,28-/m1/s1
InChIKey: ARYTXMNEANMLMU-ATEDBJNTSA-N
XLogP: 9.6
TPSA: 20.2
H-Bond Donors: 1
H-Bond Acceptors: 1

== ChEBI definition ==
Campestanol is a C28-steroid and a 3beta-sterol. It derives from a hydride of a 5alpha-campestane.

== Literature on campestanol ==

[PMID 41742181] Ergostane steroid, as one of the major contributor to cranberry derived extracellular vesicle nanoparticles, restores ovarian function of murine premature ovarian failure
2026
BackgroundA high-fat and high-sugar (HFHS) diet can induce ovarian insufficiency and premature ovarian failure (POF) by inducing the abnormal expression of multiple metabolic pathways that makes treatment difficult. We previously evaluated cranberry (Vaccinium, Va)-derived extracellular vesicle nanoparticles (Va-PENs) for their therapeutic potential in HFHS diet-induced POF in mice and herein examined, in greater detail, the molecular mechanism(s) underlying Va-PENs action in the treatment of the condition.MethodsVa-PENs were isolated, purified, and subsequently fed to our HFHS-POF model mice. Conventional H&E and immunohistochemical staining methods were used to observe the pathologic changes and protein expression in the murine ovarian tissues. Liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry high-throughput metabolomic analysis was used to investigate the distribution and content of various metabolites in Va-PENs, cranberry, and murine serum. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western-blot analyses were used to determine the mRNA and protein expression levels in cell proliferation and aging and mitochondrial function in ovarian granulosa cells of the model mice.ResultsOral administration of Va-PENs significantly improved the pathologic aging status of ovarian granulosa cells in the HFHS-POF mice, reduced the proportion of atretic follicles, and corrected sex hormone (anti-Müllerian hormone, estradiol, and follicle-stimulating hormone) concentrations and blood lipid disorders. High-throughput metabolomic analysis revealed ergostane steroids (particularly campestanol) as key bioactive components shared between Va-PENs and cranberry. Oral delivery of campestanol replicated the therapeutic effects of Va-PENs, restoring granulosa cell morphology, inhibiting follicular atresia, normalizing sex hormone levels, and reducing cellular senescence markers by modulating the expression of the cell cycle/senescence pathway.ConclusionOur findings indicated that Va-PENs exerted potent therapeutic effects in mice with HFHS diet-induced POF. One of the potential mechanisms was ergostane steroid, as one of the major contributor to Va-PENs, significant reduction in HFHS-POF symptoms via modulating the expression of the cell cycle/senescence pathway. This study presents a safe, plant-derived, nanovesicle-based strategy for restoring ovarian function after the induction of POF.

[PMID 42354119] Comparative Characterization of Ancient Wheat Cultivars Through Fatty Acid and Phytosterol Profiling
2026
Cereal lipids influence both the nutritional value and technological properties of flours; however, their composition remains poorly characterised, particularly in ancient wheat cultivars. This study investigated the lipid fraction of flours from three ancient wheat cultivars: Risciola and Carosella (soft wheat) and Saragolla (durum wheat). Fatty acid and phytosterol profiles were analysed by GC-FID, while ATR-FTIR spectroscopy provided complementary spectral information. Antiradical activity was assessed by DPPH and ABTS assays. In all samples, polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) predominated (60.23-64.04% of total identified fatty acids), with linoleic acid as the major component. Risciola showed the highest PUFA percentage and the most favourable PUFA/SFA ratio (SFA, saturated fatty acids). β-Sitosterol was the predominant phytosterol in all cultivars, while Saragolla showed a higher percentage of phytostanols (campestanol and sitostanol). Exploratory multivariate analysis provided a visual overview of compositional patterns among cultivars, consistent with differences in lipid profiles within the analysed sample set. ATR-FTIR analysis supported the chromatographic findings, while antiradical assays indicated differences in radical-scavenging capacity. Overall, the combined chromatographic, spectroscopic, and antiradical approach highlights the lipid fraction as an informative descriptor of nutritional quality, cultivar-related compositional diversity, and potential functional relevance, supporting the targeted use of ancient wheat flours in cereal-based applications.

[PMID 39767652] Asoprisnil as a Novel Ligand Interacting with Stress-Associated Glucocorticoid Receptor
2024
Background/objective: The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is critical in regulating cortisol production during stress. This makes it a key target for treating conditions associated with hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis dysregulation, such as mental disorders. This study explores novel ligands beyond mifepristone for their potential to modulate GR with improved efficacy and safety. By investigating these interactions, we seek to identify new pharmacotherapeutic options for stress-related mental illness. Methods: The ligands asoprisnil, campestanol, and stellasterol were selected based on structural similarities to mifepristone (reference ligand) and evaluated for pharmacological and ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) properties using the SwissADME database. Molecular docking with AutoDock 4.2.6 and molecular dynamics simulations were performed to investigate ligand-protein interactions with the human glucocorticoid receptor, and binding free energies were calculated using MMPBSA. Results: Pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that asoprisnil exhibited high gastrointestinal absorption and obeyed Lipinski's rule, while mifepristone crossed the blood-brain barrier. Toxicological predictions showed that mifepristone was active for neurotoxicity and immunotoxicity, while asoprisnil, campestanol, and stellasterol displayed lower toxicity profiles. Asoprisnil demonstrated the highest stability in molecular dynamics simulations, with the highest negative binding energy of -62.35 kcal/mol, when compared to mifepristone, campestanol, and stellasterol, with binding energies of -57.08 kcal/mol, -49.99 kcal/mol, and -46.69 kcal/mol, respectively. Conclusion: This makes asoprisnil a potentially favourable therapeutic candidate compared to mifepristone. However, further validation of asoprisnil's interaction, efficacy, and safety in stress-related mental disorders through experimental studies and clinical trials is needed.

[PMID 41212775] Prediagnostic dietary phytosterol intake, inflammatory biomarkers, and colorectal cancer survival: a cohort study
2026
BackgroundThis study aimed to investigate the association of prediagnostic phytosterol intake (total phytosterols, β-sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, β-sitostanol, and campestanol) with colorectal cancer (CRC)-specific and overall survival and to explore the potential mediating role of systemic inflammation.MethodsThis study included 2799 incident CRC patients enrolled in the Guangdong Colorectal Cancer Cohort between 2010 and 2021, who were prospectively followed until December 1, 2024. Usual dietary intake during the year before diagnosis was assessed using a validated food frequency questionnaire. Inflammatory markers were measured from fasting blood samples collected at enrollment, and the pan-immune-inflammation value (PIV) was calculated as neutrophil count × platelet count × monocyte count ÷ lymphocyte count. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models and mediation analyses were conducted to assess associations between phytosterol intake, inflammation, and CRC survival, adjusting for demographic, clinical, and dietary confounders.ResultsDuring a median follow-up of 78.60 months, 717 deaths were recorded, of which 636 were attributable to CRC. Higher intakes of total phytosterols, β-sitosterol, and stigmasterol were significantly associated with improved CRC-specific survival (HRs for Q4 vs Q1: 0.76 [95% CI = 0.60 to 0.95], 0.71 [0.56 to 0.90], and 0.75 [0.60 to 0.95], respectively). Similar associations were observed for overall survival. The PIV showed a significant but modest mediating effect on the associations of β-sitosterol intake with CRC-specific survival (P = .016) and overall survival (P = .018).ConclusionsHigher prediagnostic dietary phytosterol intake was associated with improved CRC survival partially through inflammation-related pathways.

[PMID 41353323] Development of semi-dwarf Echinacea purpurea by inducing silencing of the endogenous brassinosteroid-biosynthetic gene DWF4
2025
Brassinosteroids (BRs) are plant steroidal hormones that are crucial for plant growth and development, with dwarfism being a hallmark of BR deficiency. DWARF4 (DWF4) is a key enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting C22 oxidation step in the BR biosynthetic pathway. Understanding its role in ornamental plants is crucial for developing dwarf varieties that can significantly enhance their aesthetics and broaden their applications. This study aimed to provide the functional analysis of the DWF4 gene isolated from Echinacea purpurea. We found that the EpDWF4 gene comprised a 1458 bp open reading frame that encodes 486 amino acids and is highly expressed in leaves. EpDWF4 showed high homology to AtCYP90B1, a steroid 22-alpha-hydroxylase involved in the BR biosynthetic pathway in Arabidopsis thaliana. Transgenic E. purpurea plants with suppressed EpDWF4 expression were generated using an RNA interference vector that produced hairpin-looped double-stranded RNAs, leading to sequence-specific RNA silencing of EpDWF4. This resulted in a dwarf phenotype. The physiological function of EpDWF4 was evaluated through complementation in Arabidopsis plants. EpDWF4 completely rescued the extremely dwarf phenotype of the A. thaliana dwf4-102 mutant. In addition, transgenic homozygous A. thaliana plants containing a copy of 35S: EpDWF4 in the intergenic region significantly increased in height. Moreover, steroid 22-alpha-hydroxylase activity, which converts campestanol to 6-deoxocathasterone, increased by 43% in these transgenic plants compared to wild-type A. thaliana. Our results indicate that the knockdown of BR biosynthesis-related genes by RNA interference (RNAi) supports valuable dwarf plant production for commercial horticultural or agricultural applications.
