Compound: 5alpha-dihydrodeoxycorticosterone
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:81468
PubChem CID: 6451493

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: (5S,8R,9S,10S,13S,14S,17S)-17-(2-hydroxyacetyl)-10,13-dimethyl-1,2,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,16,17-tetradecahydrocyclopenta[a]phenanthren-3-one
Molecular Formula: C21H32O3
Molecular Weight: 332.5
SMILES: C[C@]12CCC(=O)C[C@@H]1CC[C@@H]3[C@@H]2CC[C@]4([C@H]3CC[C@@H]4C(=O)CO)C
InChI: InChI=1S/C21H32O3/c1-20-9-7-14(23)11-13(20)3-4-15-16-5-6-18(19(24)12-22)21(16,2)10-8-17(15)20/h13,15-18,22H,3-12H2,1-2H3/t13-,15-,16-,17-,18+,20-,21-/m0/s1
InChIKey: USPYDUPOCUYHQL-KVHKMPIWSA-N
XLogP: 3.8
TPSA: 54.4
H-Bond Donors: 1
H-Bond Acceptors: 3

== ChEBI definition ==
A 3-oxo-5α-steroid formed from 11-deoxycorticosterone by reduction across the C4-C5 double bond.

== Literature on 5alpha-dihydrodeoxycorticosterone ==

[PMID 42211021] Metabolic Profiling Reveals Insights Into Bladder Cancer Pathogenesis and Recurrence
2026
Bladder cancer is characterized by abnormal cell proliferation within the bladder lining, yet the molecular mechanisms underlying its pathogenesis remain incompletely understood. This study aimed to identify metabolic differences between bladder cancer patients and healthy controls, as well as between patients with and without cancer recurrence, to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying disease progression and recurrence. A total of 102 participants were enrolled, comprising 82 individuals diagnosed with bladder cancer and 20 healthy controls. Based on cystoscopy and pathology findings, bladder cancer patients were further categorized into two groups: 29 with tumor recurrence and 41 without recurrence. Urinary metabolic profiling was conducted using ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC/Q-TOF/MS). Data acquisition, classification, and metabolite identification were performed using Mass Profiler Professional and the XCMS online platform (https://xcmsonline.scripps.edu). Compared to healthy controls, patients exhibited downregulation of 11-hydroxyandrosterone and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), while (±)12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid ([±]12-HETE), 5α-dihydrodeoxycorticosterone, and 21-hydroxypregnenolone were upregulated. Notably, 11-hydroxyandrosterone was further downregulated in patients with recurrent disease compared to those without recurrence. The highest area under the curve (AUC) values for distinguishing bladder cancer and recurrence were observed for (±)12-HETE and PGE2. Elucidating the roles of steroid hormones and arachidonic acid metabolism in bladder cancer may provide critical insights into its molecular mechanisms and facilitate the development of novel therapeutic and diagnostic strategies to improve outcomes for patients.

[PMID 37584305] Corticosteroids as Selective and Effective Modulators of Glycine Receptors
2023
The mechanism of the negative impact of corticosteroids on the induction and progress of mental illness remains unclear. In this work, we studied the effects of corticosteroids on the activity of neuronal glycine receptors (GlyR) and GABA-A receptors (GABAAR) by measuring the chloride current induced by the application of GABA (2 or 5 μM) to isolated cerebellar Purkinje cells (IGABA) and by the application of glycine (100 μM) to pyramidal neurons of the rat hippocampus (IGly). It was found that corticosterone, 5α-dihydrodeoxycorticosterone, allotetrahydrocorticosterone, cortisol, and 17α,21-dihydroxypregnenolone were able to accelerate the desensitization of the IGly at physiological concentrations (IC50 values varying from 0.39 to 0.72 μM). Next, cortisone, 11-deoxycortisol, 11-deoxycorticosterone, 5β-dihydrodeoxycorticosterone, and tetrahydrocorticosterone accelerated the desensitization of IGly with IC50 values varying from 10.3 to 15.2 μM. Allotetrahydrocorticosterone and tetrahydrocorticosterone potentiated the IGABA albeit with high EC50 values (18-23 μM). The rest of the steroids had no effect on IGABA in the range of concentrations of 1-100 μM. Finally, our study has suggested a structural relationship of the 3β-hydroxyl group/3-oxo group with the selective modulatory activity on GlyRs in contrast to the 3α-hydroxyl group that is pivotal for GABAARs. In summary, our results suggest that increased GlyR desensitization by corticosteroids may contribute to brain dysfunction under chronic stress and identify corticosteroids for further development as selective modulators of GlyRs.

[PMID 33270955] Effects of prenatal stress on neuroactive steroid responses to acute stress in adult male and female rats
2021
Acute swim stress results in the robust production of several neuroactive steroids, which act as mediators of the stress response. These steroids include glucocorticoids, and positive GABAA receptor modulatory steroids such as allopregnanolone and tetrahydrocorticosterone (THDOC), which potentiate inhibitory GABA signalling, thereby playing a role in the negative control of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Prenatally stressed (PNS) offspring exhibit increased vulnerability to stress-related disorders and frequently display exaggerated HPA axis responses to stressors during adulthood, which may be a result of reduced neuroactive steroid production and consequently inhibitory signalling. Here, we investigated whether exposure of rats to prenatal social stress from gestational day 16-20 altered neuroactive steroid production under non-stress conditions and in response to an acute stressor (swim stress) in adulthood. Using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, nine neuroactive steroids were quantified (corticosterone, deoxycorticosterone [DOC], dihydrodeoxycorticosterone, THDOC, progesterone, dihydroprogesterone, allopregnanolone, pregnenolone, testosterone) in plasma and in five brain regions (frontal cortex, hypothalamus, amygdala, hippocampus, brainstem) of male and female control and PNS rats. There was no difference in the neuroactive steroid profile between control and PNS rats under basal conditions. The increase in circulating corticosterone induced by acute swim stress was similar in control and PNS offspring. However, greater stress-induced corticosterone and DOC concentrations were observed in the brainstem of male PNS offspring, whereas DOC concentrations were lower in the hippocampus of PNS females compared to controls, following acute stress. Although PNS rats did not show deficits in allopregnanolone responses to acute stress, there were modest deficits in the production of THDOC in the brainstem, amygdala, and frontal cortex of PNS males and in the frontal cortex of PNS females. The data suggest that neuroactive steroid modulation of GABAergic signalling following stress exposure may be affected in a sex- and region-specific manner in PNS offspring.

[PMID 30194779] Sex-dependent changes in neuroactive steroid concentrations in the rat brain following acute swim stress
2018
Sex differences in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activity are well established in rodents. In addition to glucocorticoids, stress also stimulates the secretion of progesterone and deoxycorticosterone (DOC) from the adrenal gland. Neuroactive steroid metabolites of these precursors can modulate HPA axis function; however, it is not known whether levels of these steroids differ between male and females following stress. In the present study, we aimed to establish whether neuroactive steroid concentrations in the brain display sex- and/or region-specific differences under basal conditions and following exposure to acute stress. Brains were collected from male and female rats killed under nonstress conditions or following exposure to forced swimming. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was used to quantify eight steroids: corticosterone, DOC, dihydrodeoxycorticosterone (DHDOC), pregnenolone, progesterone, dihydroprogesterone (DHP), allopregnanolone and testosterone in plasma, and in five brain regions (frontal cortex, hypothalamus, hippocampus, amygdala and brainstem). Corticosterone, DOC and progesterone concentrations were significantly greater in the plasma and brain of both sexes following stress; however, the responses in plasma were greater in females compared to males. This sex difference was also observed in the majority of brain regions for DOC and progesterone but not for corticosterone. Despite observing no stress-induced changes in circulating concentrations of pregnenolone, DHDOC or DHP, concentrations were significantly greater in the brain and this effect was more pronounced in females than males. Basal plasma and brain concentrations of allopregnanolone were significantly higher in females; moreover, stress had a greater impact on central allopregnanolone concentrations in females. Stress had no effect on circulating or brain concentrations of testosterone in males. These data indicate the existence of sex and regional differences in the generation of neuroactive steroids in the brain following acute stress, especially for the 5α-reduced steroids, and further suggest a sex-specific expression of steroidogenic enzymes in the brain. Thus, differential neurosteroidogenesis may contribute to sex differences in HPA axis responses to stress.

[PMID 19655698] Finasteride treatment and neuroactive steroid formation
2009
Finasteride is the 5alpha-reductase inhibitor that received clinical approval for the treatment of human benign prostate hyperplasia and androgenetic alopecia. The 5alpha-reductase is enzyme responsible for the reduction of testosterone to dihydrostestosterone, progesterone to dihydroprogesterone and deoxycorticosterone to dihydrodeoxycorticosterone, steroids modulating the action of gamma-aminobutyric acid on GABA receptors. These neuroactive steroids possess anticonvulsant, antidepressant and anxiolytic effects. The objective of the study was to determine the effect of finasteride therapy on a broad steroid spectrum in men with benign prostate hyperplasia. A group of 20 men with benign prostate hyperplasia was involved in the present study. Finasteride in the daily dose of 5 mg/day was administrated for 4 months. In all individuals, their hormonal profile of steroid hormones was determined before and after 4 months lasting finasteride treatment. Finasteride treatment resulted in a significant decrease all alpha-reduced and increase of most 5beta-reduced metabolites of testosterone and progesterone as well as in an increase of 7alpha-hydoxyderivatives, which are known as neuroactive steroids acting by modulation of GABAA and NMAD receptors in the brain. In the course of finasteride treatment the decrease of the concentration of circulating steroids with known inhibitory activity on GABA-ergic excitation in the brain is very probably an important factors contributing to the development of the symptoms of depression seen in some isolated cases of finasteride administration.
