Compound: cholesteryl ester
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:17002

== ChEBI definition ==
A sterol ester obtained by formal condensation of the carboxy group of any carboxylic acid with the 3-hydroxy group of cholesterol.

== Literature on cholesteryl ester ==

[PMID 42215370] Cholesteryl ester accumulation as a biomarker for personalized selection of fertility-preserving therapies in endometrioid endometrial carcinoma
2026
Fertility-preserving treatments for young women with endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC) have limited effectiveness, with only ∼50% of patients responding to first-line progesterone therapy. The absence of reliable methods to predict clinical response during the six-month treatment window creates substantial clinical uncertainty. Here, we developed EEC patient-derived tumor-like cell clusters (PTCs). Utilizing label-free hyperspectral stimulated Raman scattering microscopy in PTCs, we identified cholesteryl ester as an independent biomarker for progesterone response, achieving 86.2% predictive accuracy in a retrospective clinical cohort. Strikingly, progesterone-insensitive patients receiving progesterone-statin combination therapy exhibited a significantly higher 6-month complete response rate compared to those treated with progesterone alone (66.67% vs. 7.69%; HR = 13.00, 95% confidence interval (CI): 2.80-60.28, P < 0.001), including one documented case of post-treatment conception culminating in live birth. Mechanistically, fibroblast-specific cholesteryl ester accumulation was strongly associated with progesterone insensitivity. These results present a biomarker-guided strategy to optimize personalized fertility-preserving therapies in EEC.

[PMID 41357559] Hepatic Steatosis: A Presentation of Cholesteryl Ester Storage Disease
2025
Cholesteryl ester storage disease is a rare genetic disorder caused by mutations in the LIPA gene, resulting in lysosomal acid lipase deficiency, which leads to abnormal accumulation of cholesteryl esters and triglycerides within lysosomes. We describe a case of late-onset cholesteryl ester storage disease in a woman with elevated liver enzymes, histologic evidence of microvesicular steatosis and cirrhosis, with a confirmed LIPA mutation, who initiated enzyme replacement therapy with sebelipase alfa. This case highlights the importance of considering hereditary disorders of lipid metabolism in patients presenting unexpectedly with steatotic liver disease in the absence of significant metabolic risk factors.

[PMID 41286604] Abnormal cholesterol-cholesteryl ester metabolism impairs mouse oocyte quality during ovarian aging
2025
BackgroundOvarian aging-induced decline in oocyte quality has been a main issue in women of advanced maternal age. However, the potential mechanism remains elusive, and there are no effective strategies to ameliorate aged oocyte quality. The lipid metabolism of oocytes has drawn great attention, but the intrinsic regulation of oocyte quality by metabolites, metabolic enzymes, and intracellular mediators is less well-characterized.MethodsTargeted lipidomics was employed to detect the neutral lipids in oocytes during maturation. We used 4,4-difluoro-1,3,5,7,8-pentamethyl-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene (BODIPY 493/503) and Filipin to stain cholesteryl ester and free cholesterol, respectively. The Cholesterol/Cholesteryl Ester Quantification Assay kit was used further to quantify cholesterol-related metabolites. Western blotting was performed to evaluate acyl-coenzyme A: cholesterol acyltransferase 1/2 (ACAT1/2) expression. Immunofluorescence and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) were conducted to validate the knockdown efficiency of ACAT1. Avasimibe treatment and ACAT1 small interfering RNA (siRNA) microinjection were performed to investigate the effect of impaired cholesterol-cholesteryl ester metabolism on oocyte quality. Single-oocyte RNA sequencing was conducted to explore the mechanism. Mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and mitochondrial autophagosomes were detected to evaluate mitochondrial function and mitophagy.ResultsThere is a profound increase in the conversion of cholesterol to cholesteryl ester in oocytes during maturation, which depends on ACAT1. Conversely, disturbing the homeostasis of cholesterol-cholesteryl ester metabolism by manipulating ACAT1 impairs oocyte quality, primarily manifested as decreased polar body extrusion (PBE), increased meiotic defects, and abnormal early embryonic development. Mechanistically, the impaired conversion of cholesterol to cholesteryl ester reduces oocyte mitophagy, leading to mitochondrial dysfunction, including reduced MMP and ATP production, and excessive accumulation of ROS. Notably, we also reveal that this metabolic homeostasis is impaired in aged oocytes, accompanied by decreased ACAT1 levels. Moreover, cholesteryl ester supplementation via cholesterol conjugated to methyl-β-cyclodextrin (CCM) can effectively ameliorate aged oocyte quality by enhancing mitophagy.ConclusionsThis study reveals the mechanism by which cholesterol-cholesteryl ester metabolism regulates oocyte quality and thus participates in the process of oocyte aging by influencing mitophagy and mitochondrial function.

[PMID 42344162] Cholesteryl ester storage disease-a rare case of elevated liver enzymes and cholesterol levels with similarities to familial hypercholesterolaemia: a case report
2026
BackgroundCholesteryl ester storage disease (CESD) is a rare genetic disorder caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the lipase A (LIPA) gene encoding lysosomal acid lipase (LAL). LAL deficiency is characterized by progressive accumulation of cholesteryl esters in hepatocytes and macrophages, ultimately leading to organ damage and potentially hepatic failure.Case summaryHere we describe a girl with biochemistry similar to familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) having a total cholesterol of 9.3 mmol/L, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol of 7.1 mmol/L, triglycerides of 2.7 mmol/L, and alanine transaminase of 354 U/L. Whole genome sequencing found her to be compound heterozygous for NM_000235.4:c.894G>A p.(Gln298=) and NM_000235.4:c.419G>A p.(Trp140*) in the LIPA gene, consistent with the diagnosis compound heterozygous CESD. The patient had no clinical signs of cholesterol deposits and no symptoms suggestive of organ damage.DiscussionThis case report highlights the difficulties in diagnosing a rare subclinical disease with similarities to FH followed by discussion of current treatment options.

[PMID 42231906] Phospholipids that Plug the Pores of Cholesteryl Ester Transfer Protein Control Its Triglyceride Transfer
2026
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), a key drug target in cardiovascular disease, primarily regulates plasma circulating levels of lipids (within high, low, and very-low-density lipoproteins). In addition to its terminal openings, CETP has 2 additional openings, plugged by a phospholipid (PL) each. However, the mechanism, by which CETP moves lipids between lipoproteins, and roles of PL plugs in CETP function remain elusive. Further, small-molecule inhibitors targeting CETP tunnel displace PL during CETP inhibition. Here, using steered molecular dynamics simulations followed by in vitro mutagenesis, we show that CETP-bound PLs are indispensable in establishing the optimal architecture of CETP tunnel. PLs were critical in synchronizing domain movements of CETP while accelerating triglyceride traversal through the tunnel and their activity regulated through salt bridge interactions. Most notably, PLs bound within the CETP tunnel accelerated lipid movement through a novel "gliding" mechanism, in which a bound PL directly facilitates the movement of a second lipid species. Structural and functional analyses revealed that lipid traversal through the central tunnel of CETP was facilitated through hydrophobic-interaction-mediated diffusion. Further, conserved phenylalanine flaps regulated lipid movement by concerted opening and closing to prevent lipid backflow in the absence of an active motor. This study provides in-depth understanding of the mechanism of lipid exchange by CETP, guided and accentuated by its interaction with PLs. The conserved nature of these critical structural elements suggests that this mechanism may extend to other members of this family, expanding our understanding of lipid transport in this clinically important protein class.
