Compound: testosterone
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:17347
PubChem CID: 6013

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: (8R,9S,10R,13S,14S,17S)-17-hydroxy-10,13-dimethyl-1,2,6,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,16,17-dodecahydrocyclopenta[a]phenanthren-3-one
Molecular Formula: C19H28O2
Molecular Weight: 288.4
SMILES: C[C@]12CC[C@H]3[C@H]([C@@H]1CC[C@@H]2O)CCC4=CC(=O)CC[C@]34C
InChI: InChI=1S/C19H28O2/c1-18-9-7-13(20)11-12(18)3-4-14-15-5-6-17(21)19(15,2)10-8-16(14)18/h11,14-17,21H,3-10H2,1-2H3/t14-,15-,16-,17-,18-,19-/m0/s1
InChIKey: MUMGGOZAMZWBJJ-DYKIIFRCSA-N
XLogP: 3.3
TPSA: 37.3
H-Bond Donors: 1
H-Bond Acceptors: 2

== ChEBI definition ==
An androstanoid having 17β-hydroxy and 3-oxo groups, together with unsaturation at C-4‒C-5..

== Literature on testosterone ==

[PMID 39816223] Sustanon suppresses spermatogenesis and increases cell death
2024
BackgroundAnabolic-androgenic steroids (AAS) are synthetic derivatives of testosterone. Sustanon, dissolved in peanut oil, is an AAS used by athletes to build muscle mass. This study aims to examine the effects of Sustanon on male reproductive health.MethodsAdult male rats were divided into four groups under standard conditions. The control group received an intramuscular injection of the Sustanon solvent. The second, third, and fourth groups were treated with different doses (10, 20, and 30 mg/kg body weight) of Sustanon for 8 weeks. Blood samples, testes, and spermatozoa were collected for laboratory tests. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized from total RNA, and the expression of deleted in azoospermia like (DAZL) and B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2) genes was measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Histopathological analysis was performed on the testes.ResultsThe BCL2 gene had significantly lower expression in the treatment groups compared to the control group. There was no significant increase in the expression of DAZL. Significant reductions in testicular length, diameter, weight, sperm count, luteinizing hormone (LH), and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) concentrations were observed in the treatment groups. Histological changes were evident in the testes of the treated groups.ConclusionsSustanon likely induces adverse effects on the male reproductive system, potentially decreasing fertility. The study provides critical insights into the negative impacts of Sustanon on spermatogenesis and cell survival.

[PMID 39873473] The Impact of Levothyroxine and Testosterone Administration on Bladder Contractility in the Rat Model of Propylthiouracil-Induced Hypothyroidism
2025
ObjectiveTo investigate the effects of testosterone (T) treatment, with or without levothyroxine, the most widely used and least effective medication for managing hypothyroidism, on the functional and histological changes in propylthiouracil (PTU)- induced hypothyroid rat bladders.MethodsMale rats (n=35) were split into control, hypothyroid, hypothyroid rats treated with levothyroxine (20 µg/kg/day, oral, 2-weeks), hypothyroid rats treated with Sustanon (10 mg/kg,iIM, once/week, 2-weeks), and hypothyroid rats treated with combined treatment groups. Hypothyroidism was induced by PTU (0.05% in drinking water, 6 weeks). The serum concentration of triiodothyronine (T3), thyroxine (T4), total T, and the detrusor muscle's contractile responses were determined. A morphological study was conducted using Masson trichrome staining.ResultsTriiodothyronine, T4, and T levels were considerably reduced in rats with hypothyroidism; however, these hormones were restored by levothyroxine and Sustanon. Compared to controls, the combination therapy improved the ratio of smooth muscle to collagen and the contractile responses to carbachol, electrical field stimulation, and adenosine triphosphate in the hypothyroid bladder.ConclusionThe authors' research suggests that hypothyroidism may affect the contractility and morphology of the bladder. In males with hypothyroidism and urogenital system dysfunction, combination therapy with thyroid hormones and T has a major impact on repairing detrusor smooth muscle contractility and bladder histomorphology.

[PMID 40474339] An Exploratory Research to Evaluate the 30 Most Common Pulmonary Embolism Drugs in the Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event Reporting System
2025
BackgroundsPulmonary embolism (PE) is a common disease and a common cause of death. However, it is currently unclear which clinically common drugs can lead to PE.MethodsWe collected, organized, and analyzed reports from the first quarter of 2018 to the fourth quarter of 2022. We performed disproportionality analysis algorithms to calculate reporting odds ratio (ROR), which could quantify the signal values of different adverse events (AEs).ResultsWe have screened a total of 3091 drugs, with AE containing "PE" and calculated the ROR signal values of the top 30 drugs reported and ranked them. TESTIM (ROR = 32.03[28.77-35.66]), BARICITINIB (ROR = 23.48[20.55-26.83]), and NUVARIANG (ROR = 19.89[17.13-23.10]) are the drugs with the strongest correlation with PE. In addition, among the 30 drugs with the strongest correlation with PE, most of which are Biologics & Immunomodulators. Therefore, when using these 30 drugs, it is necessary to be alert to the possible risk of PE.ConclusionIn our study, we filtered 30 common drugs that could cause PE through the FAERS public database, which provides theoretical support for drug selection in the treatment of malignant tumors and IMID.

[PMID 37105943] Combined levothyroxine and testosterone treatment for restoring erectile dysfunction in propylthiouracil-induced hypothyroid rats
2023
BackgroundSexual dysfunction may indicate severe endocrine diseases. Recent research has suggested a link between hypothyroidism, low testosterone (T) levels, and erectile dysfunction (ED); however, the exact cause is unknown.AimWe sought to investigate possible beneficial effects of levothyroxine and T alone or in combination on ED in propylthiouracil (PTU)-induced hypothyroid rats.MethodsAdult Wistar rats (n = 35) were divided into 5 groups: control, PTU-induced hypothyroidism, PTU + levothyroxine, PTU + Sustanon (a mixture of 4 types of T: propionate, phenylpropionate, isocaproate, and decanoate) and PTU + levothyroxine + Sustanon. PTU was given in drinking water for 6 weeks. Four weeks after PTU administration, levothyroxine (20 μg microgram kg/day, oral) and Sustanon (10 mg/kg/week, intramuscular) were given for 2 weeks. Serum levels of total T, triiodothyronine (T3), and thyroxine (T4) were determined. In vivo erectile response and in vitro relaxant responses were measured. Localization of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS), endothelial NOS (eNOS), and phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) were determined using immunohistochemical analysis. The relative area of smooth muscle to collagen was measured using Masson trichrome staining.OutcomesOutcome variables included in vivo erectile function, in vitro relaxant and contractile responses of corpus cavernosum (CC) strips; protein localization of eNOS, nNOS, and PDE5; and smooth muscle content in penile tissue.ResultsThe rat model of hypothyroidism showed a significant decline in serum levels of total T, T3, and T4. Levothyroxine increased T3 and T4 levels, whereas Sustanon normalized only total T levels. Combined treatment enhanced all hormone levels. Rats with hypothyroidism displayed the lowest erectile response (P Clinical implicationsThe combination of thyroid hormones and T is likely to be a therapeutic approach for treatment of hypothyroidism-induced ED in men.Strengths and limitationsBeneficial effects of levothyroxine and Sustanon treatment were shown in vitro and in vivo in PTU-induced hypothyroid rats. The main limitation of the study was the lack of measurement of androgen-sensitive organ weights and luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and prolactin levels.ConclusionThese findings demonstrate that neurogenic and endothelium-dependent relaxation responses are reduced by hypothyroidism, which is detrimental to T levels and erectile responses. Levothyroxine and Sustanon combination medication was able to counteract this effect.

[PMID 37235781] Serum Insulin-like Factor 3, Testosterone, and LH in Experimental and Therapeutic Testicular Suppression
2023
BackgroundSerum insulin-like factor 3 (INSL3) is a Leydig cell biomarker, but little is known about the circulating concentration of INSL3 during hypothalamus-pituitary-testicular suppression.AimTo study the concomitant changes in serum concentrations of INSL3, testosterone, and LH during experimental and therapeutic testicular suppression.MethodsWe included serum samples from 3 different cohorts comprising subjects before and after testicular suppression: (1) 6 healthy young men who were treated with androgens (Sustanon, Aspen Pharma, Dublin, Ireland); 2) 10 transgender girls (male sex assigned at birth) who were treated with 3-monthly GnRH agonist injections (Leuprorelinacetat, Abacus Medicine, Copenhagen, Denmark); and (3) 55 patients with prostate cancer who were randomized to surgical castration (bilateral subcapsular orchiectomy) or treatment with GnRH agonist (Triptorelin, Ipsen Pharma, Kista, Sweden). Serum INSL3 and testosterone concentrations were quantified in stored serum samples using validated liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry methodologies, and LH was measured by an ultrasensitive immunoassay.ResultsThe circulating concentrations of INSL3, testosterone, and LH decreased during experimental testicular suppression in healthy young men by Sustanon injections and subsequently returned to baseline levels after release of suppression. All 3 hormones decreased during therapeutic hormonal hypothalamus-pituitary-testicular suppression in transgender girls and in patients with prostate cancer.ConclusionINSL3 resembles testosterone as a sensitive marker of testicular suppression and reflects Leydig cell function, also during exposure to exogenous testosterone. Serum INSL3 measurements may complement testosterone as a Leydig cell marker in male reproductive disorders, during therapeutic testicular suppression as well as in surveillance of illicit use of androgens.
