Compound: hopan-22-ol
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:36484
PubChem CID: 164874

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: 2-[(3S,3aS,5aR,5bR,7aS,11aS,11bR,13aR,13bS)-5a,5b,8,8,11a,13b-hexamethyl-1,2,3,3a,4,5,6,7,7a,9,10,11,11b,12,13,13a-hexadecahydrocyclopenta[a]chrysen-3-yl]propan-2-ol
Molecular Formula: C30H52O
Molecular Weight: 428.7
SMILES: C[C@]12CC[C@@H]([C@@H]1CC[C@@]3([C@@H]2CC[C@H]4[C@]3(CC[C@@H]5[C@@]4(CCCC5(C)C)C)C)C)C(C)(C)O
InChI: InChI=1S/C30H52O/c1-25(2)15-9-16-28(6)22(25)14-19-30(8)24(28)11-10-23-27(5)17-12-20(26(3,4)31)21(27)13-18-29(23,30)7/h20-24,31H,9-19H2,1-8H3/t20-,21-,22-,23+,24+,27-,28-,29+,30+/m0/s1
InChIKey: PNJBOAVCVAVRGR-UDCAXGDQSA-N
XLogP: 9.9
TPSA: 20.2
H-Bond Donors: 1
H-Bond Acceptors: 1

== ChEBI definition ==
A hopanoid that is hopane substituted by a hydroxy group at position 22.

== Literature on hopan-22-ol ==

[PMID 37082019] The antimicrobial peptide Polybia-MP1 differentiates membranes with the hopanoid, diplopterol from those with cholesterol
2021
Polybia-MP1 is an antimicrobial peptide that shows a decreased activity in membranes with cholesterol (CHO). Since it is now accepted that hopanoids act as sterol-surrogates in some sterol-lacking bacteria, we here inquire about the impact of Polybia-MP1 on membranes containing the hopanoid diplopterol (DP) in comparison to membranes with CHO. We found that, despite the properties induced on lipid membranes by DP are similar to those induced by CHO, the effect of Polybia-MP1 on membranes with CHO or DP was significantly different. DP did not prevent dye release from LUVs, nor the insertion of Polybia-MP1 into monolayers, and peptide-membrane affinity was higher for those with DP than with CHO. Zeta potentials ( ζ ) for DP-containing LUVs showed a complex behavior at increasing peptide concentration. The effect of the peptide on membrane elasticity, investigated by nanotube retraction experiments, showed that peptide addition softened all membrane compositions, but membranes with DP got stiffer at long times. Considering this, and the ζ results, we propose that peptides accumulate at the interface adopting different arrangements, leading to a non-monotonic behavior. Possible correlations with cell membranes were inquired testing the antimicrobial activity of Polybia-MP1 against hopanoid-lacking bacteria pre-incubated with DP or CHO. The fraction of surviving cells was lower in cultures incubated with DP compared to those incubated with CHO. We propose that the higher activity of Polybia-MP1 against some bacteria compared to mammalian cells is not only related to membrane electrostatics, but also the composition of neutral lipids, particularly the hopanoids, could be important.

[PMID 31499020] Hopanoids, like sterols, modulate dynamics, compaction, phase segregation and permeability of membranes
2019
In recent years, hopanoids, a group of pentacyclic compounds found in bacterial membranes, are in the spotlight since it was proposed that they induce order in lipid membranes in a similar way cholesterol do in eukaryotes, despite their structural differences. We studied here whether diplopterol (an abundant hopanoid) promoted similar effects on model membranes as sterols do. We analyzed the compaction, dynamics, phase segregation, permeability and compressibility of model membranes containing diplopterol, and compared with those containing sterols from animals, plants and fungi. We also tested the effect that the incubation with diplopterol had on hopanoid-lacking bacteria. Our results show that diplopterol induces phase segregation, increases lipid compaction, and decreases permeability on phospholipid membranes, while retaining membrane fluidity and compressibility. Furthermore, the exposition to this hopanoid decreases the permeability of the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa and increases the resistance to antibiotics. All effects promoted by diplopterol were similar to those generated by the sterols. Our observations add information on the functional significance of hopanoids as molecules that play an important role in membrane organization and dynamics in model membranes and in a bacterial system.

[PMID 31268719] Hopanoids Like Sterols Form Compact but Fluid Films
2019
Hopanoids are pentacyclic molecules present in membranes from some bacteria, recently proposed as sterol surrogates in these organisms. Diplopterol is an abundant hopanoid that, similar to sterols, does not self-aggregate in lamellar structures when pure, but forms monolayers at the air-water interface. Here, we analyze the interfacial behavior of pure diplopterol and compare it with sterols from different organisms: cholesterol from mammals, ergosterol from fungi, and stigmasterol from plants. We prepared Langmuir monolayers of the compounds and studied their surface properties using different experimental approaches and molecular dynamics simulations. Our results indicate that the films formed by diplopterol, despite being compact with low mean molecular areas, high surface potentials, and high refractive index, depict shear viscosity values similar to that for fluid films. Altogether, our results reveal that hopanoids have similar interfacial behavior than that of sterols, and thus they may have the capacity of modulating bacterial membrane properties in a similar way sterols do in eukaryotes.

[PMID 36775968] A carbonate corrosion experiment at a marine methane seep: The role of aerobic methanotrophic bacteria
2023
Methane seeps are typified by the formation of authigenic carbonates, many of which exhibit corrosion surfaces and secondary porosity believed to be caused by microbial carbonate dissolution. Aerobic methane oxidation and sulfur oxidation are two processes capable of inducing carbonate corrosion at methane seeps. Although the potential of aerobic methanotrophy to dissolve carbonate was confirmed in laboratory experiments, this process has not been studied in the environment to date. Here, we report on a carbonate corrosion experiment carried out in the REGAB Pockmark, Gabon-Congo-Angola passive margin, in which marble cubes were deployed for 2.5 years at two sites (CAB-B and CAB-C) with apparent active methane seepage and one site (CAB-D) without methane seepage. Marble cubes exposed to active seepage (experiment CAB-C) were found to be affected by a new type of microbioerosion. Based on 16S rRNA gene analysis, the biofilms adhering to the bioeroded marble mostly consisted of aerobic methanotrophic bacteria, predominantly belonging to the uncultured Hyd24-01 clade. The presence of abundant 13 C-depleted lipid biomarkers including fatty acids (n-C16:1ω8c , n-C18:1ω8c , n-C16:1ω5t ), various 4-mono- and 4,4-dimethyl sterols, and diplopterol agrees with the dominance of aerobic methanotrophs in the CAB-C biofilms. Among the lipids of aerobic methanotrophs, the uncommon 4α-methylcholest-8(14)-en-3β,25-diol is interpreted to be a specific biomarker for the Hyd24-01 clade. The combination of textural, genetic, and organic geochemical evidence suggests that aerobic methanotrophs are the main drivers of carbonate dissolution observed in the CAB-C experiment at the REGAB pockmark.

[PMID 35842218] Production of cholesterol-like molecules impacts Escherichia coli robustness, production capacity, and vesicle trafficking
2022
The economic viability of bioprocesses is constrained by the limited range of operating conditions that can be tolerated by the cell factory. Engineering of the microbial cell membrane is one strategy that can increase robustness and thus alter this range. In this work, we targeted cellular components that contribute to maintenance of appropriate membrane function, such as: flotillin-like proteins, membrane structural proteins, and membrane lipids. Specifically, we exploited the promiscuity of squalene hopene cyclase (SHC) to produce polycyclic terpenoids with properties analogous to cholesterol. Strains producing these cholesterol-like molecules were visualized by AFM and height features were observed. Production of these cholesterol-like molecules was associated with increased tolerance towards a diversity of chemicals, particularly alcohols, and membrane trafficking processes such as lipid droplet accumulation and production of extracellular vesicles. This engineering approach improved the production titers for wax-esters and ethanol by 80- and 10-fold, respectively. Expression of SHC resulted in the production of steroids. Strains engineered to also express truncated squalene synthase (tERG9) produced diplopterol and generally did not perform as well. Increased expression of several membrane-associated proteins, such as YqiK, was observed to impact vesicle trafficking and further improve tolerance relative to SHC alone, but did not improve bio-production. Deletion of YbbJ increased lipid droplet accumulation as well as production of intracellular wax esters. This work serves as a proof of concept for engineering strategies targeting membrane physiology and trafficking to expand the production capacity of microbial cell factories.
