Compound: ecdysone
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:16688
PubChem CID: 19212

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: (2S,3R,5R,9R,10R,13R,14S,17R)-17-[(2S,3R)-3,6-dihydroxy-6-methylheptan-2-yl]-2,3,14-trihydroxy-10,13-dimethyl-2,3,4,5,9,11,12,15,16,17-decahydro-1H-cyclopenta[a]phenanthren-6-one
Molecular Formula: C27H44O6
Molecular Weight: 464.6
SMILES: C[C@@H]([C@H]1CC[C@@]2([C@@]1(CC[C@H]3C2=CC(=O)[C@H]4[C@@]3(C[C@@H]([C@@H](C4)O)O)C)C)O)[C@@H](CCC(C)(C)O)O
InChI: InChI=1S/C27H44O6/c1-15(20(28)8-9-24(2,3)32)16-7-11-27(33)18-12-21(29)19-13-22(30)23(31)14-25(19,4)17(18)6-10-26(16,27)5/h12,15-17,19-20,22-23,28,30-33H,6-11,13-14H2,1-5H3/t15-,16+,17-,19-,20+,22+,23-,25+,26+,27+/m0/s1
InChIKey: UPEZCKBFRMILAV-JMZLNJERSA-N
XLogP: 1.7
TPSA: 118
H-Bond Donors: 5
H-Bond Acceptors: 6

== ChEBI definition ==
A 6-oxo steroid that is 5β-cholest-7-en-6-one substituted by hydroxy groups at positions 2, 3, 14, 22 and 25 respectively (the 2β, 3β, 22<i>R</i> stereoisomer). It is a steroid prohormone of the major insect moulting hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone.

== Literature on ecdysone ==

[PMID 42421656] Ecdysone Receptor autonomously controls germ cell differentiation in the Drosophila ovary
2026
The steroid hormone ecdysone controls Drosophila ovarian germline stem cell (GSC) maintenance and germ cell differentiation. Prior studies demonstrated that ecdysone regulates germ cell differentiation non-autonomously via the nuclear receptor Ecdysone Receptor (EcR) in ovarian somatic cells. Although EcR is also expressed in germ cells, potential direct roles for EcR in the germline independent of the soma have not been examined. Here, we demonstrate that EcR functions autonomously in GSCs and cystoblasts to control germline differentiation. While depletion of EcR from GSCs mildly reduces their maintenance, over-expression of EcR specifically in GSCs and cystoblasts impedes germ cell differentiation, phenotypically resembling bag of marbles loss-of-function and Bone Morphogenetic Protein signaling constitutive activation. We propose that EcR functions as a transcriptional repressor in GSCs and cystoblasts to suppress differentiation, but becomes derepressed as ecdysone titer increases and co-repressor expression decreases in dividing germ cell cysts, providing temporal control over germline differentiation. These data support the model that germ cells integrate signals from multiple cell sources that spatially and temporally control their differentiation in response to local and physiological cues.

[PMID 42492744] Multifaceted role of Ecdysone in Regulating Organ Growth and Patterning
2026
Ecdysone, the major steroid hormone in insects, coordinates developmental progression by coupling systemic hormonal pulses to tissue-specific cellular responses. In this review, we explore its multifaceted roles in regulating organ growth and patterning, highlighting how a single hormone can elicit diverse - and sometimes opposing - outcomes depending on cell type, developmental stage, and hormone concentration. These context-dependent responses are shaped by cell-specific chromatin landscapes, stage-specific transcription factors, and dynamic changes in cellular competence over time, ensuring that successive ecdysone pulses trigger appropriate developmental programs across tissues and life stages. Understanding how such precise spatial and temporal control is achieved remains a central and fascinating question, providing key insight into how a single hormonal signal can orchestrate the remarkable complexity of animal development.

[PMID 41988935] Multiple losses of ecdysone receptor genes in nematodes: an alternative evolutionary scenario of molting regulation
2026
Molting is a hallmark feature of ecdysozoans, including arthropods, tardigrades, and nematodes. Ecdysone hormones play a crucial role in regulating the molting process of different ecdysozoan taxa. Interestingly, despite this highly conserved function of ecdysone, the model nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has lost the ecdysone receptor (ECR) genes and their molting appears to be ecdysone-independent. The loss of ecr has only been reported in Caenorhabditis within ecdysozoans, and the evolutionary background behind this loss has remained enigmatic. Here, we show that loss of ecr is not exceptional in Caenorhabditis, but has occurred at least 3 times in Rhabditina and Tylenchina nematodes. Our genome-wide analysis of 160 nematode species revealed multiple losses of ecr and its typical heterodimer partner usp during nematode evolution. Furthermore, using transcriptomic, pharmacological, and in silico/in vivo protein interaction analyses, we identified 2 factors that potentially underlie and buffer the loss of ECR gene/function: (i) molting regulation by an alternative nuclear receptor HR3 (NHR-23) and (ii) a lineage-specific expansion of nuclear receptors in the ecr-deficient taxa. Taken together, this study shows how key regulators of ecdysozoan molting can be altered during evolution. We propose a novel scenario for the evolution of molting regulation in nematodes.

[PMID 41832401] The insulin and ecdysone pathways as regulators of diapause termination: transcriptional and protein insights from Pieris napi
2026
Insect diapause is a pre-programmed alternative developmental pathway induced to survive adverse environmental conditions and is characterized by an absence of development, metabolic suppression and increased stress resistance. While the hormonal regulation of diapause induction has been studied extensively, clear molecular hypotheses on how low-temperature driven diapause termination is controlled are lacking. Here we propose a hypothesis for this low-temperature driven diapause termination, which was synthesized from literature research and an experimental study where we correlate gene expression levels and protein abundance of key regulators to transitions across diapause stages. This hypothesis states that the forkhead transcription factor FoxO silences the reception of ecdysone by binding to the ecdysone receptor. This binding is gradually degraded by the accumulation of insulin signalling, in response to low temperatures, which causes the phosphorylation of FoxO. The continuous increase of sensitivity to ecdysone leads to the termination of diapause. We find that, across diapause, components of the PTTH–ecdysone axis, including PTTH signalling and downstream ecdysone-responsive genes, are present in low transcript and protein abundance, suggesting that developmental hormone signalling remains downregulated throughout diapause maintenance. Second, multiple elements of the insulin signalling pathway, including insulin-like peptides and core downstream kinases, are found in higher transcript abundance under prolonged low-temperature conditions, consistent with a role for insulin signalling in environmental sensing during diapause. Finally, FoxO shows high transcript and protein abundance at diapause initiation, followed by a gradual decline toward diapause termination, and FoxO protein abundance is negatively associated with insulin pathway activity. The main connection between the insulin pathway and FoxO, the protein kinase B (AKT) does not display the expected mRNA and protein levels. However, there are multiple factors contributing to the connection between insulin and FoxO and there might be another one involved in diapause. Simultaneously, ecdysone receptor components display stage-specific transcript–protein mismatches, indicating post-transcriptional regulation of hormonal sensitivity. Even though these results are correlational and need to be further investigated by experimental work in future studies, they support the proposed hypothesis. Summarizing, we propose a model in which cold-induced insulin signalling promotes FoxO degradation, progressively releasing inhibition of the ecdysone receptor and restoring ecdysone sensitivity, thereby timing diapause termination.

[PMID 41921398] The amphipod ecdysone receptor as a complementary tool for environmental risk assessment: from functional analysis to proof of concept study
2026
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) pose significant risks to aquatic wildlife by disrupting hormonal signaling pathways, notably those mediated by nuclear receptors (NRs) - key regulators of endocrine processes. For decades, in vitro bioassays based on the interaction between NRs and EDCs have been used to investigate EDC activity in chemical monitoring and risk assessment frameworks. Yet, current guidelines are mostly restricted to vertebrate species, failing to capture the diversity of chemical-induced NR-driven effects in aquatic animals - particularly arthropods, whose endocrine systems are highly divergent. Thus, this study aimed to develop an in vitro approach for the assessment of EDCs targeting ecdysone signaling, a key endocrine pathway regulating molting and development in arthropods. For this, we have examined the ecdysone receptor (EcR), a target of ecdysone-mimicking pesticides, and its heterodimeric partner, the retinoid X receptor (RXR), both crucial for ecdysone-mediated signaling, in key amphipod species for freshwater and coastal ecosystems, Gammarus fossarum and G. locusta. Following identification and phylogenetic validation, we established a luciferase-based reporter gene assay that allowed us to characterize EcR:RXR responsiveness to ecdysteroids (e.g., ponasterone A), as well as the detection of chemicals with EcR-disrupting activity, such as the insecticides methoxyfenozide and tebufenozide. The application of this tool was then extended to environmental water samples, for the screening of French river basins, providing the first proof of concept for the identification of sampling sites with putative EcR agonistic activity. These findings aim to offer a complementary approach to current environmental frameworks, in the scope of investigative monitoring, towards the inclusion of underrepresented invertebrate species.
