Compound: sterol
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:15889
PubChem CID: 1107

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17-hexadecahydro-1H-cyclopenta[a]phenanthren-3-ol
Molecular Formula: C17H28O
Molecular Weight: 248.4
SMILES: C1CC2CCC3C4CCC(CC4CCC3C2C1)O
InChI: InChI=1S/C17H28O/c18-13-6-9-15-12(10-13)5-8-16-14-3-1-2-11(14)4-7-17(15)16/h11-18H,1-10H2
InChIKey: FPXSXMFOYWRHDX-UHFFFAOYSA-N
XLogP: 5.1
TPSA: 20.2
H-Bond Donors: 1
H-Bond Acceptors: 1

== ChEBI definition ==
Any 3-hydroxy steroid whose skeleton is closely related to cholestan-3-ol (additional carbon atoms may be present in the side chain).

== Literature on sterol ==

[PMID 42207024] A sterol reductase responsible for the unusual 8(14)-unsaturation in bacterial sterol production and degradation
2026
Sterols are a class of lipids that play a crucial role in human health through their essential physiological roles and as a point of interaction between commensal and pathogenic bacteria. The biosynthesis and modification of these lipids is a well-characterized process in many eukaryotes and increasingly in bacteria. However, the proteins responsible for formation of the unusual 8(14)-unsaturation found in the sterols produced by aerobic methanotrophs, dinoflagellates, nematodes, and marine sponges, remains unknown. Here, we utilize a heterologous expression system to identify a bacterial 8,14-sterol reductase (8,14-Bsr) responsible for generating the 8(14)-unsaturation in the aerobic methanotroph Methylococcus capsulatus. This enzyme modifies the direct product of C-14 demethylation, reducing one double bond in the nuclear core structure and isomerizing the other to produce an 8(14)-sterol. We subsequently tested the requirement of putative active site residues for catalysis through site directed mutagenesis, identifying residues likely involved in interacting with the sterol substrate and directly catalyzing this reaction. Bioinformatic analysis of the distribution of 8,14-Bsr reveals it is unique to the bacterial domain, found primarily in the Methylococcaceae family, the Mycobacteriales order, and yet uncultured members of the Myxococcota phylum. Further phylogenetic analysis of 8,14-Bsr suggests it shares an evolutionary history with the C-14 demethylase in these organisms and that these two enzymes were likely inherited together. These results provide insight into novel sterol biochemistry, further delimiting sterol biosynthesis in the bacterial domain from eukaryotes and illustrating the importance of molecular characterization to identify bacterial proteins that interact with sterols.IMPORTANCEMany of the eukaryotic proteins required for the biosynthesis of sterols, such as cholesterol, have been characterized. However, the pathways governing analogous processes in the bacterial domain are less characterized. Here, we identify an 8,14-sterol reductase in aerobic methanotrophs. This enzyme carries out a unique biochemical reaction, saturating and isomerizing double bonds in the nuclear core structure to produce an 8(14)-sterol. This reductase is restricted to the bacterial domain, further separating the evolution of bacterial sterol production from eukaryotes. Additionally, we find this reductase is prevalent in members of the sterol degrading order Mycobacteriales, highlighting a potential role for this protein in the remodeling of host sterol production by these pathogens.

[PMID 42478765] Molecular Dynamics-Guided Sterol Engineering of mRNA-Lipid Nanoparticles Reprograms Biodistribution and Enhances Spleen-Selective Immunity
2026
Multicomponent membrane organization of mRNA-lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) critically determines their formulation behavior, organ selectivity, and immunological outcomes. However, compared to ionizable lipids, sterols remain a relatively underexplored design axis. This study discusses the engineering of a library of nine bile acid-derived sterols with different hydroxylation patterns and alkyl tail lengths, and systematically maps how sterol structure governs formulation-level properties and organ-level expression profiles. After integrating physicochemical characterization with all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, the experimentally observed formulation behaviors correlate with MD-derived membrane structural descriptors. These descriptors provide a quantitative evaluation framework for prioritizing sterol chemotypes based on their predicted encapsulation performance and membrane organization, supporting the notion that sterol-dependent membrane organization provides a structural basis for formulation properties, including mRNA encapsulation. Moreover, substituting cholesterol with bile acid-derived sterols consistently attenuated hepatic expression and shifted organ-level expression toward spleen-dominant profiles, which is central to immune priming and adaptive immune activation. Among bile acid-derived sterols, CA-20 LNPs functionally enhance antigen-specific humoral immunity and elicit antigen-specific cellular immune responses, including improved memory-associated immune features, while maintaining an acute safety profile. Collectively, these results establish sterol engineering as a powerful design strategy for modulating LNP formulation properties, in vivo fate, and immunological function.

[PMID 41873861] Sterol binding mechanism of a plant START-like domain: A new sterol transport paradigm via an amphiphilic cavity
2026
Redistribution of sterols among cellular compartments is crucial for the proper functions of different organelles, but how sterols are transported in plants is barely studied. Here, we identified that Arabidopsis C2 and GRAM domain-containing proteins C2GR1/2, a specialized subgroup of the lipid transfer proteins anchored at membrane contact sites (LAMs), transport sterols between membranes via their first START-like domains (SLD1s), while the SLD2 domains are inactive. Structural studies on C2GR2-SLD1/SLD2 elucidated that the sterol transport process involves the exchange of sterol and water, which requires the proper size and the amphiphilic nature of the cavity, as well as the conformational changes of the three Ω loops at the entrance. Importantly, the amphiphilicity of the cavity is shared by other SLD domains in yeast and mammals, a feature that was overlooked by previous studies. These findings not only advance our understanding of sterol transport in plants but also redefine the sterol transport paradigm for LAM proteins.

[PMID 41907429] Specialization and adaptation in pollen sterol use by wild bees
2026
Sterols are stabilizing components of membranes and hormone precursors in eukaryotes. Honeybees incorporate a subset of pollen-derived sterols into their tissues rather than converting phytosterols to cholesterol, as most insect herbivores do. To establish whether this approach to sterol acquisition was typical of all bees, we measured the sterolome of 56 bee species representing all major bee families to identify and quantify which pollen sterols they used. The Δ5 sterols, 24-methylenecholesterol, isofucosterol, and β-sitosterol, which are common components of pollen sterolomes, were also the main sterols in most bee species, but this was not so in a minority of species suggesting they had different sterol requirements. Generalists contained more 24-methylenecholesterol than their specialist congeners, suggesting an adaptation to use pollen sterols that occur widely in plants, whereas Asteraceae specialists use pollen sterols that are not used by generalists, which may explain the Asteraceae paradox. Overall, our data suggest an ecological rather than phylogenetic driver of bee sterol composition.

[PMID 42105949] Macrophage signaling and function are regulated by distinct sterol biochemistries
2026
Membranes require continuous reorganization of lipid components, including sterols, to dynamically alter their rigidity to deform and bend during scission events that occur during fundamental cellular functions such as endocytosis. While diseases of cholesterol biosynthesis result in reduced cellular cholesterol and accumulation of precursor sterols, limited studies have addressed the intracellular consequences of disease-associated sterol changes in the ability of eukaryotic cellular membranes to function and signal normally. Here, we utilized bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) to investigate how altered sterol content impacts macrophage signaling and membrane function. Through pharmacological inhibition of cholesterol biosynthetic enzymes, reduced cholesterol and increased levels of disease-associated sterol intermediates coincided with reduced expression of cell surface proteins and impaired macropinocytosis. Macropinocytic activity was sensitive to both reduced plasma membrane cholesterol and sterols containing functional groups substituted for the C3 hydroxyl group. Transcriptomic analyses of cholesterol-inhibited BMDMs revealed alterations in immune and chemokine signaling pathways. Decreased cholesterol was also associated with dysregulated vesicular sorting pathways and elevated expression of endosomal/lysosomal markers. Disrupted endosome expression and impaired macropinocytosis were also observed in BMDMs from mouse models of the cholesterol biosynthesis disorder Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS). Our findings detail an important connection between sterol imbalance, membrane dynamics, and immune cell function.
