Compound: cholesteryl beta-D-glucoside
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:17495
PubChem CID: 440145

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: (2R,3R,4S,5S,6R)-2-[[(3S,8S,9S,10R,13R,14S,17R)-10,13-dimethyl-17-[(2R)-6-methylheptan-2-yl]-2,3,4,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,16,17-dodecahydro-1H-cyclopenta[a]phenanthren-3-yl]oxy]-6-(hydroxymethyl)oxane-3,4,5-triol
Molecular Formula: C33H56O6
Molecular Weight: 548.8
SMILES: C[C@H](CCCC(C)C)[C@H]1CC[C@@H]2[C@@]1(CC[C@H]3[C@H]2CC=C4[C@@]3(CC[C@@H](C4)O[C@H]5[C@@H]([C@H]([C@@H]([C@H](O5)CO)O)O)O)C)C
InChI: InChI=1S/C33H56O6/c1-19(2)7-6-8-20(3)24-11-12-25-23-10-9-21-17-22(13-15-32(21,4)26(23)14-16-33(24,25)5)38-31-30(37)29(36)28(35)27(18-34)39-31/h9,19-20,22-31,34-37H,6-8,10-18H2,1-5H3/t20-,22+,23+,24-,25+,26+,27-,28-,29+,30-,31-,32+,33-/m1/s1
InChIKey: FSMCJUNYLQOAIM-UQBZCTSOSA-N
XLogP: 6.9
TPSA: 99.4
H-Bond Donors: 4
H-Bond Acceptors: 6

== ChEBI definition ==
Cholesteryl beta-D-glucoside is a sterol 3-beta-D-glucoside and a monosaccharide derivative. It is functionally related to a cholesterol.

== Literature on cholesteryl beta-D-glucoside ==

[PMID 37682174] Biosynthesis, structure and biological function of cholesterol glucoside in Helicobacter pylori: A review
2023
Helicobacter pylori (H pylori) is a common pathogen, and about 50% of the world population have been infected with it, so the infection of H pylori has been an urgent public health problem worldwide. H pylori has evolved a variety of strategies to help itself colonize, adapt to the environment and proliferate. Cholesterol glucoside (CG), a characteristic substance in H pylori, is related to the membrane stability, morphology, inflammation induction and immune evasion of H pylori. Therefore, CG may be a new target to weaken the infection effect of H pylori. The biosynthesis process, structure and biological function of CG specific to H pylori, as well as anti-CG drugs are discussed and analyzed in this review, in order to explore whether the inhibition of CG synthesis can be an effective strategy to eradicate H pylori.

[PMID 38740934] Nanoparticles for inducing Gaucher disease-like damage in cancer cells
2024
Nutrient avidity is one of the most distinctive features of tumours. However, nutrient deprivation has yielded limited clinical benefits. In Gaucher disease, an inherited metabolic disorder, cells produce cholesteryl-glucoside which accumulates in lysosomes and causes cell damage. Here we develop a nanoparticle (AbCholB) to emulate natural-lipoprotein-carried cholesterol and initiate Gaucher disease-like damage in cancer cells. AbCholB is composed of a phenylboronic-acid-modified cholesterol (CholB) and albumin. Cancer cells uptake the nanoparticles into lysosomes, where CholB reacts with glucose and generates a cholesteryl-glucoside-like structure that resists degradation and aggregates into microscale crystals, causing Gaucher disease-like damage in a glucose-dependent manner. In addition, the nutrient-sensing function of mTOR is suppressed. It is observed that normal cells escape severe damage due to their inferior ability to compete for nutrients compared with cancer cells. This work provides a bioinspired strategy to selectively impede the metabolic action of cancer cells by taking advantage of their nutrient avidity.

[PMID 36914020] Effect of the number of sugar units on the interaction between diosgenyl saponin and membrane lipids
2023
Saponin is the main bioactive component of the Dioscorea species, which are traditionally used for treating chronic diseases. An understanding of the interaction process of bioactive saponins with biomembranes provides insights into their development as therapeutic agents. The biological effects of saponins have been thought to be associated with membrane cholesterol (Chol). To shed light on the exact mechanisms of their interactions, we investigated the effects of diosgenyl saponins trillin (TRL) and dioscin (DSN) on the dynamic behavior of lipids and membrane properties in palmitoyloleolylphosphatidylcholine (POPC) bilayers using solid-state NMR and fluorescence spectroscopy. The membrane effects of diosgenin, a sapogenin of TRL and DSN, are similar to those of Chol, suggesting that diosgenin plays a major role in membrane binding and POPC chain ordering. The amphiphilicity of TRL and DSN enabled them to interact with POPC bilayers, regardless of Chol. In the presence of Chol, the sugar residues more prominently influenced the membrane-disrupting effects of saponins. The activity of DSN, which bears three sugar units, led to perturbation and further disruption of the membrane in the presence of Chol. However, TRL, which bears one sugar residue, increased the ordering of POPC chains while maintaining the integrity of the bilayer. This effect on the phospholipid bilayers is similar to that of cholesteryl glucoside. The influence of the number of sugars in saponin is discussed in more detail.

[PMID 38135762] Efficient lipidomic approach for the discovery of lipid ligands for immune receptors by combining LC-HRMS/MS analysis with fractionation and reporter cell assay
2024
C-type lectin receptors (CLRs), which are pattern recognition receptors responsible for triggering innate immune responses, recognize damaged self-components and immunostimulatory lipids from pathogenic bacteria; however, several of their ligands remain unknown. Here, we propose a new analytical platform combining liquid chromatography-high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry with microfractionation capability (LC-FRC-HRMS/MS) and a reporter cell assay for sensitive activity measurements to develop an efficient methodology for searching for lipid ligands of CLR from microbial trace samples (crude cell extracts of approximately 5 mg dry cell/mL). We also developed an in-house lipidomic library containing accurate mass and fragmentation patterns of more than 10,000 lipid molecules predicted in silico for 90 lipid subclasses and 35 acyl side chain fatty acids. Using the developed LC-FRC-HRMS/MS system, the lipid extracts of Helicobacter pylori were separated and fractionated, and HRMS and HRMS/MS spectra were obtained simultaneously. The fractionated lipid extract samples in 96-well plates were thereafter subjected to reporter cell assays using nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)-green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter cells expressing mouse or human macrophage-inducible C-type lectin (Mincle). A total of 102 lipid molecules from all fractions were annotated using an in-house lipidomic library. Furthermore, a fraction that exhibited significant activity in the NFAT-GFP reporter cell assay contained α-cholesteryl glucoside, a type of glycolipid, which was successfully identified as a lipid ligand molecule for Mincle. Our analytical platform has the potential to be a useful tool for efficient discovery of lipid ligands for immunoreceptors.

[PMID 34706729] Enhanced enzymatic production of cholesteryl 6'-acylglucoside impairs lysosomal degradation for the intracellular survival of Helicobacter pylori
2021
BackgroundDuring autophagy defense against invading microbes, certain lipid types are indispensable for generating specialized membrane-bound organelles. The lipid composition of autophagosomes remains obscure, as does the issue of how specific lipids and lipid-associated enzymes participate in autophagosome formation and maturation. Helicobacter pylori is auxotrophic for cholesterol and converts cholesterol to cholesteryl glucoside derivatives, including cholesteryl 6'-O-acyl-α-D-glucoside (CAG). We investigated how CAG and its biosynthetic acyltransferase assist H. pylori to escape host-cell autophagy.MethodsWe applied a metabolite-tagging method to obtain fluorophore-containing cholesteryl glucosides that were utilized to understand their intracellular locations. H. pylori 26695 and a cholesteryl glucosyltransferase (CGT)-deletion mutant (ΔCGT) were used as the standard strain and the negative control that contains no cholesterol-derived metabolites, respectively. Bacterial internalization and several autophagy-related assays were conducted to unravel the possible mechanism that H. pylori develops to hijack the host-cell autophagy response. Subcellular fractions of H. pylori-infected AGS cells were obtained and measured for the acyltransferase activity.ResultsThe imaging studies of fluorophore-labeled cholesteryl glucosides pinpointed their intracellular localization in AGS cells. The result indicated that CAG enhances the internalization of H. pylori in AGS cells. Particularly, CAG, instead of CG and CPG, is able to augment the autophagy response induced by H. pylori. How CAG participates in the autophagy process is multifaceted. CAG was found to intervene in the degradation of autophagosomes and reduce lysosomal biogenesis, supporting the idea that intracellular H. pylori is harbored by autophago-lysosomes in favor of the bacterial survival. Furthermore, we performed the enzyme activity assay of subcellular fractions of H. pylori-infected AGS cells. The analysis showed that the acyltransferase is mainly distributed in autophago-lysosomal compartments.ConclusionsOur results support the idea that the acyltransferase is mainly distributed in the subcellular compartment consisting of autophagosomes, late endosomes, and lysosomes, in which the acidic environment is beneficial for the maximal acyltransferase activity. The resulting elevated level of CAG can facilitate bacterial internalization, interfere with the autophagy flux, and causes reduced lysosomal biogenesis.
