Compound: algestone
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:763
PubChem CID: 11687

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: (8R,9S,10R,13S,14S,16R,17S)-17-acetyl-16,17-dihydroxy-10,13-dimethyl-2,6,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,16-decahydro-1H-cyclopenta[a]phenanthren-3-one
Molecular Formula: C21H30O4
Molecular Weight: 346.5
SMILES: CC(=O)[C@]1([C@@H](C[C@@H]2[C@@]1(CC[C@H]3[C@H]2CCC4=CC(=O)CC[C@]34C)C)O)O
InChI: InChI=1S/C21H30O4/c1-12(22)21(25)18(24)11-17-15-5-4-13-10-14(23)6-8-19(13,2)16(15)7-9-20(17,21)3/h10,15-18,24-25H,4-9,11H2,1-3H3/t15-,16+,17+,18-,19+,20+,21-/m1/s1
InChIKey: CXDWHYOBSJTRJU-SRWWVFQWSA-N
XLogP: 2.7
TPSA: 74.6
H-Bond Donors: 2
H-Bond Acceptors: 4

== ChEBI definition ==
A C<small><sub>21</sub></small>-steroid that is pregn-4-ene substituted by oxo groups at position 3 and 20 and hydroxy groups at positions 16 and 17.

== Literature on algestone ==

[PMID 40895441] Cross-sex hormone therapy in rats induces sex-specific adaptations of renal function and sodium transporters expression
2025
IntroductionCross-sex hormone therapy (CHT) has been used in the gender identity-affirming process. Nevertheless, the literature about the renal repercussions of this therapy is scarce.ObjectiveEvaluate the effects of CHT on blood pressure (BP) and renal function.MethodsMale and female Wistar rats were distributed into groups: M + H (male + hormone), M + V (male + vehicle), F + H (female + hormone), and F + V (female + vehicle). CHT: M + H received algestone-acetophenide (3 mg/kg) plus estradiol-enanthate (0.18 mg/kg); F + H, testosterone-cypionate (3 mg/kg). The vehicle was sesame oil. After 2 months of treatment, BP and renal function [inulin clearance (GFR), ions, and acid excretions] were evaluated. Sodium transporters expression (NHE3, NCC, α-ENaC, and β-ENaC) was assessed by immunohistochemistry.ResultsCompared to M + V, M + H presented reduction in BP and GFR but increase in sodium and potassium excretion. GFR did not change in F + H, but sodium and potassium excretions were reduced. Ammonium excretion was decreased in M + H but increased in F + H. The NHE3 expression decreased in M + H and increased in F + H; females showed higher expression of NCC, while CHT did not change it. The β-EnaC expression was higher in females; CHT increased it in males and females.ConclusionCHT induces sex-specific renal adaptations. Testosterone in females reduces the excretion of sodium and other ions, which may predispose to hypertension. Conversely, estradiol + algestone in males decrease the glomerular filtration rate and alter sodium handling, suggesting maladaptive responses. The expression of sodium transporters was altered in a sex- and nephron segment-specific manner. These findings highlight the need for further studies on the renal consequences of hormone therapy in transgender individuals.

[PMID 39927118] Targeting NANOS1 in triple-negative breast cancer: synergistic effects of digoxin and PD-1 inhibitors in modulating the tumor immune microenvironment
2024
IntroductionTriple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast cancer resistant to endocrine and targeted therapies. Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have shown significant efficacy in various cancers. Taraxacum officinale, commonly known as dandelion, has traditionally been used to treat breast-related diseases and is recognized for its beneficial composition and low side effects. FDA-approved drugs, having undergone rigorous validation for their safety, efficacy, and quality, provide a foundation for drug repurposing research. Researchers may explore FDA-approved drugs targeting the potential target NANOS1 for TOE (Taraxacum officinale extract) treatment to develop innovative therapeutic strategies. In this context, Dig (Digoxin) and AA (Algestone acetophenide) have been identified as potential drug candidates for further exploration of their therapeutic effects and application potential in targeting NANOS1.MethodsRNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was employed to identify potential targets for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) from TOE. Bioinformatics tools, including bc-GenExMiner v4.8, the Human Protein Atlas, and the TIMER database, were utilized for target identification. Molecular docking studies assessed FDA-approved drugs interacting with these targets, with Dig and AA selected as candidate drugs. The therapeutic efficacy of Dig and AA in combination with PD-1 inhibitors was evaluated using the 4T1 mouse model. Flow cytometry was applied to assess lymphocyte infiltration in the tumor immune microenvironment. RNA-seq analysis after target silencing by small interfering RNA (siRNA) was performed, followed by Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis. Validation of findings was conducted through quantitative PCR and Western blot analysis.ResultsTOE inhibited TNBC cell growth, migration, and invasion, as assessed by CCK-8 and transwell assays. RNA-seq indicated the effects may be due to NANOS1 down-regulation. Survival analysis showed lower NANOS1 expression correlated with better prognosis. Immunoinfiltration analysis indicated a negative correlation between NANOS1 levels and activated NK cells. Molecular docking identified Dig and AA as high-affinity binders of NANOS1. Animal experiments showed Dig and PD-1 inhibitor combination enhanced immunotherapy efficacy for TNBC.DiscussionThe findings from this study suggest that TOE may offer a novel therapeutic approach for TNBC by targeting NANOS1, a protein whose down-regulation is associated with improved patient outcomes. The negative correlation between NANOS1 and activated NK cells highlights the potential role of the immune system in TNBC pathogenesis and response to treatment. The identification of Dig as potential drugs targeting NANOS1 provides a new direction for drug repurposing in TNBC. The synergistic effect of Dig and PD-1 inhibition observed in animal models is promising and warrants further investigation into the role of immunotherapy in TNBC treatment. Overall, this study identifies NANOS1 as a new target for TNBC therapy and suggests a combination therapy approach that could enhance immunotherapy effectiveness and improve patient outcomes.

[PMID 37025534] Multifocal glioblastoma and hormone replacement therapy in a transgender female
2023
BackgroundGlioblastoma multiforme represents approximately 60% of all brain tumors in adults. This malignancy shows a high level of biological and genetic heterogeneity associated with exceptional aggressiveness, leading to poor patient survival. One of the less common presentations is the appearance of primary multifocal lesions, which are linked with a worse prognosis. Among the multiple triggering factors in glioma progression, the administration of sex steroids and their analogs has been studied, but their role remains unclear to date.Case descriptionA 43-year-old transgender woman who has a personal pathological history of receiving intramuscular (IM) hormone treatment for 27 years based on algestone/estradiol 150 mg/10 mg/mL. Three months ago, the patient suddenly experienced hemiplegia and hemiparesis in her right lower extremity, followed by a myoclonic focal epileptic seizure, vertigo, and a right frontal headache with a visual analog scale of 10/10. Magnetic resonance imaging images revealed an intra-axial mass with poorly defined, heterogeneous borders, and thick borders with perilesional edema in the left parietal lobe, as well as a rounded hypodense image with well-defined walls in the right internal capsule. The tumor was resected, and samples were sent to the pathology department, which confirmed the diagnosis of wild-type glioblastoma.ConclusionThis report identifies prolonged use of steroid-based hormone replacement therapy as the only predisposing factor in the oncogenesis of multifocal glioblastoma. It is an example that highlights the importance for physicians not to consider pathologies related to the human immunodeficiency virus rather than neoplasms in transgender patients in view of progressive neurological deterioration.

[PMID 32930580] A New Strategy for the Analysis of Steroid Hormones in Industrial Wastewaters by Paper Spray Ionization Mass Spectrometry
2020
A new approach using paper spray ionization mass spectrometry (PSI-MS) for the analysis of steroid hormones in wastewater samples has been demonstrated. Triangular papers containing paraffin barriers as microfluidic channels were used to direct the sample solution to the paper tip, preventing the sample from spreading over the corners of the paper. The method was used to analyze the hormones levonorgestrel and algestone acetophenide in industrial wastewaters. Analytical curves presented a correlation coefficient (R2) above 0.99. Limits of quantification were below 2.3 ppm and limits of detection below 0.7 ppm. Values of precision (coefficient of variation) and accuracy (relative error) were less than 15% for all analyses. Recovery results ranged from 82% to 102%. Levonorgestrel was also analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry in order to compare the analytical performance with PSI-MS. No statistically significant differences were found between both methods. This study demonstrates the usefulness of PSI-MS for rapid analysis of hormones in industrial wastewater samples and also indicates its potential to be employed as a simple and reliable analytical method in environmental sciences.

[PMID 35029663] Association of Hormonal Contraceptive Use With Adverse Health Outcomes: An Umbrella Review of Meta-analyses of Randomized Clinical Trials and Cohort Studies
2022
ImportanceMeta-analyses have reported conflicting data on the safety of hormonal contraception, but the quality of evidence for the associations between hormonal contraceptive use and adverse health outcomes has not been quantified in aggregate.ObjectiveTo grade the evidence from meta-analyses of randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and cohort studies that assessed the associations between hormonal contraceptive use and adverse health outcomes among women.Data sourcesMEDLINE, Embase, and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews were searched from database inception to August 2020. Search terms included hormonal contraception, contraceptive agents, progesterone, desogestrel, norethindrone, megestrol, algestone, norprogesterones, and levonorgestrel combined with terms such as systematic review or meta-analysis.Evidence reviewThe methodological quality of each meta-analysis was graded using the Assessment of Multiple Systematic Reviews, version 2, which rated quality as critically low, low, moderate, or high. The Grading of Recommendation, Assessment, Development and Evaluations approach was used to assess the certainty of evidence in meta-analyses of RCTs, with evidence graded as very low, low, moderate, or high. Evidence of associations from meta-analyses of cohort studies was ranked according to established criteria as nonsignificant, weak, suggestive, highly suggestive, or convincing.ResultsA total of 2996 records were screened; of those, 310 full-text articles were assessed for eligibility, and 58 articles (13 meta-analyses of RCTs and 45 meta-analyses of cohort studies) were selected for evidence synthesis. Sixty associations were described in meta-analyses of RCTs, and 96 associations were described in meta-analyses of cohort studies. Among meta-analyses of RCTs, 14 of the 60 associations were nominally statistically significant (P ≤ .05); no associations between hormonal contraceptive use and adverse outcomes were supported by high-quality evidence. The association between the use of a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system and reductions in endometrial polyps associated with tamoxifen use (odds ratio [OR], 0.22; 95% CI, 0.13-0.38) was graded as having high-quality evidence, and this evidence ranking was retained in the subgroup analysis. Among meta-analyses of cohort studies, 40 of the 96 associations were nominally statistically significant; however, no associations between hormonal contraceptive use and adverse outcomes were supported by convincing evidence in the primary and subgroup analyses. The risk of venous thromboembolism among those using vs not using oral contraception (OR, 2.42; 95% CI, 1.76-3.32) was initially supported by highly suggestive evidence, but this evidence was downgraded to weak in the sensitivity analysis.Conclusions and relevanceThe results of this umbrella review supported preexisting understandings of the risks and benefits associated with hormonal contraceptive use. Overall, the associations between hormonal contraceptive use and cardiovascular risk, cancer risk, and other major adverse health outcomes were not supported by high-quality evidence.
