Compound: campesterol
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:28623
PubChem CID: 173183

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: (3S,8S,9S,10R,13R,14S,17R)-17-[(2R,5R)-5,6-dimethylheptan-2-yl]-10,13-dimethyl-2,3,4,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,16,17-dodecahydro-1H-cyclopenta[a]phenanthren-3-ol
Molecular Formula: C28H48O
Molecular Weight: 400.7
SMILES: C[C@H](CC[C@@H](C)C(C)C)[C@H]1CC[C@@H]2[C@@]1(CC[C@H]3[C@H]2CC=C4[C@@]3(CC[C@@H](C4)O)C)C
InChI: InChI=1S/C28H48O/c1-18(2)19(3)7-8-20(4)24-11-12-25-23-10-9-21-17-22(29)13-15-27(21,5)26(23)14-16-28(24,25)6/h9,18-20,22-26,29H,7-8,10-17H2,1-6H3/t19-,20-,22+,23+,24-,25+,26+,27+,28-/m1/s1
InChIKey: SGNBVLSWZMBQTH-PODYLUTMSA-N
XLogP: 8.8
TPSA: 20.2
H-Bond Donors: 1
H-Bond Acceptors: 1

== ChEBI definition ==
Campesterol is a 3beta-hydroxy-Delta(5)-steroid, a C28-steroid, a member of phytosterols and a 3beta-sterol. It has a role as a mouse metabolite. It derives from a hydride of a campestane.

== Literature on campesterol ==

[PMID 42221304] Campesterol induces apoptosis and inhibits proliferation in HepG2 liver cancer cells
2026
Aim of the studyHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary liver malignancy and a leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. Despite advances in therapy, the prognosis remains poor, highlighting the need for novel, low-toxicity therapeutic strategies. Campesterol, a naturally occurring dietary phytosterol, has been reported to exert anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects in various cancers, yet its activity in liver cancer cells remains underexplored.Material and methodsThe anticancer potential of campesterol was evaluated in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells. Cells were treated with increasing concentrations of campesterol (10, 50, 100, and 200 μg/ml) for 24 h. Cell viability and proliferation were assessed by MTT and crystal violet assays, while cell death was quantified by trypan blue exclusion. Data were analysed using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post-hoc test, with p ResultsCampesterol exhibited a dose-dependent effect on HepG2 cells. No significant change in viability was observed at lower concentrations (10-100 μg/ml), whereas a marked reduction in cell viability and increase in cell death were detected at 200 μg/ml (p ConclusionsThese findings demonstrate that campesterol reduces viability and promotes apoptosis in HepG2 cells, suggesting its potential as a low-toxicity adjunct in HCC therapy. Further mechanistic investigations and in vivo studies are warranted to validate its translational applicability.

[PMID 42046284] Targeting Cancer Signaling Pathways With Plant Sterols: Emerging Roles of Stigmasterol, Campesterol, and β-Sitosterol
2026
Plant sterols are naturally occurring tetracyclic triterpenes that serve as essential structural components of plant cell membranes. Structurally similar to cholesterol, these bioactive compounds have gained considerable attention for their diverse therapeutic properties, particularly their anticancer potential. Among them, stigmasterol, campesterol, and β-sitosterol are the most abundant and well-studied phytosterols known for their multifaceted roles in tumor suppression and apoptosis induction. They modulate several oncogenic signaling pathways, including PI3K/AKT/mTOR, JAK/STAT, NF-κB, and Wnt/β-catenin, thereby inhibiting cancer progression. Their anticancer activities involve mechanisms such as cell cycle arrest, activation of mitochondria-mediated apoptosis, inhibition of angiogenesis, and suppression of metastasis. Specifically, stigmasterol promotes apoptosis by upregulating Bax and p53, downregulating Bcl-2, and inhibiting angiogenic and JAK/STAT signaling. Campesterol induces cancer cell death through mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and endoplasmic reticulum stress, enhancing the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents. β-sitosterol inhibits proliferation, triggers cell cycle arrest, regulates apoptotic proteins, and suppresses metastasis while overcoming drug resistance. Despite extensive individual studies, a comprehensive review summarizing their collective anticancer mechanisms is lacking. This work bridges that gap by systematically analyzing literature from the past 10 years across major databases, including Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, Scopus, Wiley Online Library, and Web of Science. Evidence from preclinical, clinical, and pharmacological studies was critically evaluated to highlight the therapeutic potential of these sterols in tumor suppression and apoptosis, providing a consolidated foundation for future drug discovery and development. The unique contribution of this review lies in proposing a comparative mechanistic framework for stigmasterol, campesterol, and β-sitosterol, integrating their multi-targeted actions across key oncogenic signaling pathways to highlight their collective potential in anticancer therapy.

[PMID 41158021] Sterol Metabolism in Ovariectomized Rats: Potential Roles of Campesterol and 4β-Hydroxycholesterol in Osteoporosis
2026
Osteoporosis is characterized by low bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue. Lipid metabolism disorders may contribute to osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. Phytosterols and oxysterols (OC) are involved in lipid metabolism. However, their roles in bone metabolism and in the development of osteoporosis remain unclear. This study used ovariectomized (OVX) rats, commonly used to study osteoporosis, to analyze the levels of sterols, including phytosterols, cholesterol, and oxysterols in the humerus, femur, femoral bone marrow, blood, and liver. Sterol levels were measured through gas chromatography. We observed that campesterol and cholesterol exhibited similar patterns of change in the blood, liver, and bone marrow. Conversely, cholesterol and campesterol levels in the femur did not change significantly, while bone marrow cholesterol levels decreased. The similar changes in campesterol and cholesterol levels suggest that these sterols are derived from the blood and taken up by the bone marrow. Significant increases in 4β-hydroxycholesterol were found in the humerus, plasma, and liver of OVX rats. The ratio of 4β-hydroxycholesterol to cholesterol in the bone marrow was significantly increased in OVX rats. These findings suggest that 4β-hydroxycholesterol is associated with OVX-induced osteoporosis and contributes to the decline in bone density.

[PMID 41201482] Campesterol attenuates airway inflammation in allergic asthma: insights from a murine model and molecular docking analysis
2026
Asthma is a complex condition associated with increased morbidity, mortality, healthcare costs, and a diminished quality of life. It is now understood as a heterogeneous disease with various clinical manifestations rather than a single entity. Campesterol, a plant sterol, has demonstrated anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties in animal models. Allergic asthma was induced in BALB/c mice using ovalbumin through intraperitoneal sensitization on the 1st and 14th days of the study, followed by intranasal challenges from the 15th to the 21st day. The mice were then treated with three different doses of campesterol and the standard drug methylprednisolone for 7 days post-intranasal challenge. The mRNA expression levels of IL-4, IL-5, AQP-1, and AQP-5 were assessed using real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Histopathological analysis of lung tissues was conducted using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Differential and total leukocyte counts were measured in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and blood using an automatic hematology analyzer. The data were statistically analyzed using one-way ANOVA and post hoc Tukey's test. In silico molecular docking was performed to assess the binding affinity and interaction profiles of campesterol with target proteins, including JAK2, TNF-α, and NF-κB, which are involved in inflammatory pathways. Treatment with campesterol led to a reduction in total leukocyte count (TLC) and differential leukocyte count (DLC), as well as suppression of inflammatory cell infiltration. There was a significant decrease in the expression levels of IL-4 and IL-5, while the expression levels of AQP-1 and AQP-5 were significantly increased. Additionally, the lung wet/dry ratio was significantly reduced following campesterol treatment. In summary, the reduction in inflammation may be linked to decreased expression levels of IL-4 and IL-5 expression levels, while the reduction in pulmonary edema may be associated with increased expression levels of aquaporin 1 and aquaporin 5. The molecular docking revealed that campesterol exhibited stronger binding affinity across target proteins. The study suggests that campesterol could serve as an alternative therapy for treating allergic asthma. These findings may contribute to improved patient compliance by reducing inflammation and potentially offering a new avenue for asthma management. The docking results exhibited that campesterol has a stronger and more stable interaction profile with key pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory targets.

[PMID 40183274] Regenerative Potential of Umbilical Cord Blood-derived Stromal Cells along with Phytosterol Campesterol in Wound Healing of a Rat Model
2025
IntroductionMesenchymal stem cells derived from umbilical cord blood (UCB-MSCs) have a well-known role in fastening the wound healing process due to their less immune rejection, anti-inflammatory effects, and their role in cellular growth. Campesterol is a nutritional phytosterol with extensive health values and a competitor of cholesterol in the blood. Campesterol shares some anti-inflammatory effects via its regulation of inflammatory markers by inhibiting the proinflammatory cytokines (including TNF-α, TGF-β1, and IL-6) levels.MethodThe purpose of this study was to assess the ameliorative role of combined therapy (campesterol and UCB-MSCs) in wound healing without immune rejection. The study comprised both invitro and in-vivo experiments. In-vitro analysis included assessments of the cell viability of campesterol on UCBMSCs using MTT, crystal blue, trypan blue, and cell scratch assays. For in-vivo trials, superficial burn wounds were created on Sprague Dawley rats to evaluate the effects of campesterol, UCB-MSCs, and their combination on healing outcomes. Tissue regeneration progress in the wound vicinity was assessed using H&E staining and ELISA (inflammatory and growth markers) analysis.ResultResults of in-vitro experiments indicated that campesterol at concentrations of 10μg, 20μg, and 30μg demonstrated the most efficient cell viability. Moreover, a 30ug dose of campesterol along with UCBMSCs was further applied, leading to smooth and uncomplicated healing in the animal models. H&E staining showed nearly normal skin tissue while hematological and biochemical markers were near to control. Serum levels of tissue growth promoter factors, including VEGF and collagen- 3, were higher, and pro-inflammatory markers (such as TGF-β1, TNF-α, and IL-6) were lower at the same time.ConclusionThe results of the combined (MSCs and campesterol) therapy showed enhanced wound healing abilities. However, further studies are recommended to explore new aspects of this promising therapeutic approach of UCB-MSCs along with steroid derivative campesterol.
