Compound: corticosterone
ChEBI ID: CHEBI:16827
PubChem CID: 5753

== Chemical properties ==
IUPAC Name: (8S,9S,10R,11S,13S,14S,17S)-11-hydroxy-17-(2-hydroxyacetyl)-10,13-dimethyl-1,2,6,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,16,17-dodecahydrocyclopenta[a]phenanthren-3-one
Molecular Formula: C21H30O4
Molecular Weight: 346.5
SMILES: C[C@]12CCC(=O)C=C1CC[C@@H]3[C@@H]2[C@H](C[C@]4([C@H]3CC[C@@H]4C(=O)CO)C)O
InChI: InChI=1S/C21H30O4/c1-20-8-7-13(23)9-12(20)3-4-14-15-5-6-16(18(25)11-22)21(15,2)10-17(24)19(14)20/h9,14-17,19,22,24H,3-8,10-11H2,1-2H3/t14-,15-,16+,17-,19+,20-,21-/m0/s1
InChIKey: OMFXVFTZEKFJBZ-HJTSIMOOSA-N
XLogP: 1.9
TPSA: 74.6
H-Bond Donors: 2
H-Bond Acceptors: 4

== ChEBI definition ==
A 21-hydroxy steroid that consists of pregn-4-ene substituted by hydroxy groups at positions 11 and 21 and oxo groups at positions 3 and 20. Corticosterone is a 21-carbon steroid hormone of the corticosteroid type produced in the cortex of the adrenal glands.

== Literature on corticosterone ==

[PMID 42456924] Variation in corticosterone and telomere dynamics according to sex and rearing environment in barn swallow nestlings
2026
Telomeres are the chromosome ends that shorten at each cell division and are widely recognized as biomarkers of individual quality and environmental stress exposure. By controlling the stress response through corticosterone release, which in turn can damage telomeres, the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis may mediate environmental influence on telomere dynamics. However, these links remain poorly investigated in wild vertebrates, especially during development. Here, in barn swallow (Hirundo rustica) nestlings, we investigated environmental, growth and sex influences on baseline corticosterone level, after acute handling-induced stress, and during recovery of homeostasis, as well as on telomere length (TL) and attrition (ΔTL) during growth. Moreover, we tested whether corticosterone levels/changes predicted TL/ΔTL. Baseline corticosterone declined with increasing body mass, suggesting condition-dependent variation in baseline HPA-axis activity. In addition, corticosterone at the end of handling increased with brood size, highlighting higher corticosterone in more competitive and energy-demanding rearing environments. Recovery was faster in heavier and faster-growing nestlings, indicating that individuals in better condition returned to homeostasis more efficiently. Heavier and faster-growing males, but not females, had shorter TL and faster ΔTL, suggesting male-specific growth costs. Moreover, among males, the relationship between corticosterone variation during acute stress response and ΔTL shifted from negative in smaller broods to positive in larger broods, suggesting increased telomere maintenance in competitive family environments. Overall, we revealed that early-life TL/ΔTL are jointly shaped by rearing conditions, HPA-axis activity, and growth in different ways among male and female offspring, possibly contributing to shape sex-specific life trajectories during adulthood through carry-over effects.

[PMID 42320875] Glucocorticoids-induced depressive-like behaviors in mice: oral ingestion of corticosterone or hydrocortisone - A comparative study
2026
Chronic administration of glucocorticoids is widely used to model stress-related depression in rodents. However, corticosterone, the primary endogenous glucocorticoid in rodents, is highly lipophilic and typically requires ethanol dissolution, which may confound behavioral outcomes. Hydrocortisone (cortisol) is also detectable in mouse blood and it displays a closely related dynamics under physiological and stressful conditions to corticosterone. This study compared the behavioral effects of oral exposure to hydrocortisone hemissucinate with corticosterone (dissolved in 1% ethanol) in mice. To this aim, male Swiss mice were orally exposed for 10 days to water, hydrocortisone (0.1 mg/ml), 1% ethanol, or corticosterone (0.1 mg/ml in 1% ethanol). Body weight was daily monitored. Behavioral assessments included sucrose preference, tail suspension, splash, open field, marble burying, social interaction, and object recognition tests. Our findings showed that both glucocorticoids induced body weight loss, and reduced sucrose preference and social interaction, besides impaired memory recognition. However, 1% ethanol increased immobility in the tail suspension test and influenced body weight, thus confounding the corticosterone-related effects. Anxiety-like behaviors assessed in the exploration to the center areas of the open field, and the number of marble buried in the home cage was unaffected after chronic glucocorticoid exposure. In conclusion, hydrocortisone induced depressive-like behaviors and cognitive impairment similar to those produced by corticosterone, but without solvent-related bias. These data support the use of repeated hydrocortisone exposure in drinking water as a methodological approach to induce depressive-like phenotype in mice.

[PMID 42337970] Corticosterone Under Experimental Manipulation of Nutrition and Parasite Burden in a Wild Rodent System
2026
Environmental pressures shape survival and life-history dynamics partly by triggering the release of glucocorticoids, whose short-term benefits but long-term costs make it essential to understand what drives their levels. Here, we used an experimental manipulation of two environmental stressors-food availability and parasite burden-to directly test how they influence fecal corticosterone metabolites (FCMs) in wild wood mice (Apodemus sylvaticus). To do so, we experimentally altered nutrition via high-quality food supplementation and reduced gastrointestinal nematode infection by anthelmintic treatment, using Heligmosomoides polygyrus as an indicator of treatment efficacy. FCM levels were not impacted by either treatment. However, our results may be mediated by variation in resource availability or masked by other factors that affect corticosterone. For example, FCMs declined seasonally, alongside a decline in the number of reproducing individuals. While we expected higher food availability and lower worm burdens to decrease stress, putatively higher rates of reproduction in food-supplemented areas may offset potential declines in corticosterone. Thus, alleviating some environmental stressors in the wild may have unintended consequences on host fitness.

[PMID 42362531] The effects of propranolol and corticosterone on susceptibility priming in a mouse model of social defeat stress
2026
Animal models for stress-related mood disorders aim to mirror the diverse spectrum of stress responses observed in humans, which ultimately determine an individual's susceptibility or capacity to cope effectively with the stressor. The acute social defeat stress (ASDS) protocol allows a rapid phenotypic classification of mice subjected to social stress to interrogate the early neural patterns beyond divergent stress outcomes. Although ASDS alone does not cause chronic depression-like behaviors, it "primes" the mouse to be highly susceptible to a subsequent, subthreshold stress (StSDS). Here, we tested whether pharmacological manipulation shortly before ASDS can counter this susceptibility priming. Specifically, we examined the β-adrenergic receptor antagonist propranolol and the glucocorticoid corticosterone. Male mice received acute intraperitoneal injections of propranolol, corticosterone, or saline prior to ASDS, followed one week later by StSDS and social interaction testing. Propranolol partially prevented the emergence of social avoidance following subsequent StSDS, without modifying the behavioral outcome of ASDS. In contrast, corticosterone administered at different doses, failed to prevent susceptibility priming to later StSDS, disrupting also the typical acute ASDS behavioral profiling at low and medium doses. The results suggest that blocking β-adrenergic signaling during an acute stressor can reduce future stress susceptibility, while underscoring the complex and dose-dependent effects of glucocorticoids on stress responsivity.

[PMID 42303344] Chronic corticosterone biases conflict-related behavior and abolishes ketamine's anticonflict effect in mice
2026
Animals must balance reward seeking against potential danger, and impairments in such conflict decision-making are common in psychiatric disorders. Here, we examined how chronic corticosterone exposure and ketamine affect conflict behavior in mice by presenting them with a three-compartment conflict task. Three weeks of corticosterone increased conflict levels without inducing anhedonia, selectively prolonging action initiation. Ketamine reduced conflict in control mice but not in corticosterone-treated mice, indicating that stress abolishes its anticonflict effect. These findings suggest that chronic stress biases conflict-related behavior and disrupts ketamine-responsive mechanisms.
